Nedra Talley, now known as Nedra Talley-Ross (born January 27, 1946), is an American singer best known as a former member of the girl group The Ronettes, in which she performed with her cousins Ronnie and Estelle Bennett.


== Career ==
In 1967, Talley and Estelle Bennett left the Ronettes, reportedly due in part to interference from the group's producer Phil Spector, who later married Ronnie Bennett. Talley said that when she met Scott Ross, her future husband, she became a born-again Christian. Talley also decided to leave the Ronettes because she felt there was little place for Christian-inspired music.In 1977, Talley recorded several Christian songs written by her church's music director, Ted Sandquist. These were released on the album The Courts of the King: The Worship Music of Ted Sandquist. One of the cuts, a medley, "Love of My Lord" / "Redwood Tree" was released as a 45 promo single. Guitarist Phil Keaggy played on at least two of the album cuts with her. For its 30th anniversary, this album was finally released on CD.In 1978, Talley recorded Full Circle, a solo contemporary Christian music album, on which she was musically backed by Keaggy. The album was produced by her husband, Ross. The album's inner sleeve featured Talley's bio (and salvation story), but also a photo taken in the mid-'60s aboard a plane with Talley and fellow Ronette, Estelle Bennett, sharing seats with The Beatles' John Lennon and George Harrison, who were great fans of the Ronettes. The album has to date, never been re-released.A four-disc set, Roger McGuinn's The Folk Den Project (1995–2005), featured the old folk song, "Follow the Drinking Gourd", as sung by McGuinn with Talley providing the sole but prominent background vocal.In 2007, the Ronettes were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.


== Personal life ==
Talley is of African American, Native American and Puerto Rican descent.  She is married to Scott Ross, a former DJ turned interviewer for The 700 Club on the Christian Broadcasting Network. They have four children. Today, she is a businesswoman working in real estate. She lives with her husband in Virginia Beach, Virginia.


== See also ==

List of Puerto Ricans


== References ==