Daliah Lavi (born Daliah Lewinbuk or Levenbuch, Hebrew: דליה לביא‎ [ˌdalja laˈvi]; 12 October 1942 – 3 May 2017) was an Israeli actress, singer, and model.


== Biography ==
Daliah Lewinbuk (or Levenbuch) (later Lavi) in Shavei Tzion, British Mandate of Palestine (now Israel), the daughter of Ruth and Reuben Lewinbuk, who were of German-Jewish and Russian-Jewish descent.At age 10 she met Kirk Douglas, who was in Israel to film The Juggler, and told him she would like to be a dancer. Douglas helped persuade her parents to send her to Stockholm, Sweden to study ballet.Lavi died on 3 May 2017, aged 74, from undisclosed causes. She resided in Asheville, North Carolina, United States where she died. Her funeral and burial were in Israel.


== Film career ==

In 1955 Lavi appeared in her first film,  Hemsöborna, a Swedish adaptation of August Strindberg's 1887 novel The People of Hemsö. Returning to Israel, her career took off in 1960 when she started appearing in a large number of European and American productions. Fluent in several languages, she acted in films in German, French, Italian, Spanish and English.Lavi was reunited with Douglas in her first American film, Vincente Minnelli's Two Weeks in Another Town (1962). Her portrayal of The Girl, Peter O'Toole's love interest, in 1965's Lord Jim was to have been her breakout American role. But audiences' tepid reaction to the film prompted Lavi to accept a new career path, frequently playing a scantily clad femme fatale.She appeared in Brunello Rondi's witch hunt-themed movie Il demonio (1963), Mario Bava's Gothic classic La Frusta e il corpo, or The Whip and the Body (1963), and the first Matt Helm film, The Silencers (1966), opposite Dean Martin.Lavi played European entertainer Ilona Bergen in the 1965 mystery film Ten Little Indians, an Agatha Christie story about a group of strangers with scandalous secrets who are lured to an Alpine chateau and murdered one by one. She also acted as 'The Detainer/007' in Casino Royale (1967).She was subsequently discovered by record producer Jimmy Bowien and began a successful schlager singing career in Germany, with hits such as "Oh, wann kommst du?", "Willst du mit mir gehn?" and "C'est ça, la vie (So ist das Leben)". In August 1971, her single "Jerusalem" peaked at number 98 in Australia.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Daliah Lavi at Wikimedia Commons
Daliah Lavi at IMDb
Daliah Lavi infosite
Daliah Lavi profile at Aveleyman.com