Vishnu Vāman Shirwādkar (27 February 1912 – 10 March 1999), popularly known by his pen name, Kusumāgraj, also known as Vi. Vā. Shirwadkar, was an eminent Marathi poet, playwright, novelist, short story writer, apart from being a humanist, who wrote of freedom, justice and emancipation of the deprived, In a career spanning five decades starting in pre-independence era, he wrote 16 volumes of poems, three novels, eight volumes of short stories, seven volumes of essays, 18 plays and six one-act plays. His works like the Vishakha (1942), a collection of lyrics, inspired a generation into the Indian freedom movement, and is today considered one of the masterpieces of Indian literature, apart from his play, Natsamrat, which has an important place in Marathi literature. He was the recipient of several State awards, and National awards including the 1974 Sahitya Akademi Award in Marathi for Natsamrat, Padma Bhushan (1991) and the Jnanapith Award in 1987; he also served as the President  of the Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan held at Margao in 1964.


== Early life and education ==
Kusumagraj (विष्णु वामन शिरवाडकर / कुसुमाग्रज) was born into a Deshastha Brahmin family  on 27 February 1912 in Pune as Gajanan Ranganath Shirwadkar. He even published some of his poetry under this name in 1930s. Upon being adopted somewhat late in life in 1930s, his name was changed to Vishnu Waman Shirwadkar. He later adopted the sobriquet 'Kusumagraj'. He pursued his primary education in Pimpalgaon and high school education in the New English School of  Nashik, which is now called J.S. Rungtha High School of Nashik. He passed matriculation from Mumbai University. In 1944, he married Manorama (née : Gangubai Sonawani) ; she died in 1972).
He was associated with Rajaram College, Kolhapur. Noted critic Keshav Rangnath Shirwadkar (1926-2018) was his younger brother. 


== Career ==
While Shirwadkar was at the H. P. T. College in Nashik, his poems were published in the Ratnakar  (रत्नाकर) magazine. In 1932, at the age of 20, Shirwadkar participated in a satyagraha to support the demand for allowing the entry of  the untouchables in the Kalaram Temple at Nashik.In 1933, Shirwadkar established the Dhruv Mandal (ध्रुव मंडळ ) and started writing in a newspaper called Nava Manu (नवा मनू). In the same year, his first collection of poems, Jeevanlahari (जीवन लहरी), was published. In 1934, Shirwadkar obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in Marathi and English languages, from the H. P. T. College in Nashik.Shirwadkar joined Godavari Cinetone Ltd. in 1936 and wrote the screenplay for the movie Sati Sulochana (सती सुलोचना). He also acted in the movie as Lord Lakshmana. However, the film failed to be a success.He later worked as a journalist. He wrote in periodicals such as Saptahik Prabha (साप्ताहिक प्रभा), Dainik Prabhat (दैनिक प्रभात), Saarathi (सारथी), Dhanurdari (धनुर्धारी), and Navayug (नवयुग).  1942 was a turning point in the career of Kusumagraj, as the father-figure of Marathi literature, Vishnu Sakharam Khandekar, published Kusumgraj's compilation of poetry, Vishakha (विशाखा) at his own expense, and in his preface describing Kusumagraj as a poet of humanity, wrote, "His words manifest the social discontent but retain the optimistic conviction that the old world was giving way to a new one." Its publication coincided with the Quit India Movement, and carried the message of freedom and stood against slavery, and soon its words became popular with young men and women; in time it was to become his lasting legacy to Indian literature.After 1943, he started adapting the plays by literary giants like Oscar Wilde, Moliere, Maurice Maeterlinck and Shakespeare, especially his tragedies, and which played an important role in boosting Marathi theatre of the period. This continued into the 1970s when his masterpiece Natsamrat , styled after Shakespeare's play King Lear , was first staged in 1970, with Sriram Lagoo as the lead. In 1946, he wrote his first novel Vaishnav (वैष्णव) and his first play Doorche Dive (दूरचे दिवे). From 1946 to 1948, he also edited a weekly called Swadesh (स्वदेश).While temperamentally he ranged from reclusive to exclusive, he had a keen social sense and championed the cause of the downtrodden without involving himself in ground level activities. In 1950, he founded the Lokahitawādi Mandal (लोकहितवादी; organisation for social good) in Nashik which is still in existence. He also edited certain academic textbooks for school students.However, Kusumagraj's main claim to fame was as a poet and writer. In 1954, he adapted Shakespeare's Macbeth as Rajmukut (राजमुकुट), 'The Royal Crown' to Marathi. It starred Nanasaheb Phatak and Durga Khote (Lady Macbeth). He also adapted Othello in 1960. He also worked as a lyricist in Marathi cinema.His work reflected the changing social milieu, from being the reflection of national uprising during Indian freedom struggle and in the post-independence era it got steeped into rising social-consciousness amongst Marathi writers, which marked the advent of modern Dalit literature.Shirwadkar was also an active participant in the Samyukta Maharashtra Movement.


== Awards and recognition ==
To honour his work in Marathi Literature, every year the birthday of Kusumagraj, 27 February, is celebrated as "Marathi Bhasha Din" (मराठी भाषा दिन).
1960 - President of Mumbai Marathi Granth Sangrahalay annual function
1960 - State Govt. for Marathi Mati 'मराठी माती' (काव्यसंग्रह)
1962 - State Govt. for Swagat 'स्वगत' (काव्यसंग्रह)
1964 - State Govt. for Himresha 'हिमरेषा' (काव्यसंग्रह)
1964 - President of Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Sahitya Sammelan, Margao, Goa
1965 - Ram Ganesh Gadkari Award 1965 by All India Nātya Parishad
1966 - State Govt. for the play Yayati ani Devyani 'ययाति आणि देवयानी'
1967 - State Govt. for the play Vij mhanali Dhartila 'वीज म्हणाली धरतीला'
1970 - President of Marathi Natya Sammelan, Kolhapur
1971 - State Govt. for the play Natsamrat 'नटससम्राट'
1974 - Sahitya Akademi Award 1974 for his writing of the play Natsamrat, an adaptation of King Lear
1985 - Ram Ganesh Gadkari Award from Akhil Bhartiya Natya Parishad
1986 - The honorary degree of D.Litt. by Pune University
1987 - Jnanpith Award  — a prestigious literary award in India, in recognition of his literary achievements
1988 - Sangeet Nātya Lekhan Award
1989 - President — Jagtik Marathi Parishad, Mumbai
1991 - Padmabhushan award in the field of Literature & Education by the then President of India - R. Venkataraman.
1996 - A star named as "Kusumagraj" in the galaxy


== Death ==
He died on 10 March 1999 in Nashik, where his home also served as the office of the 'Kusumāgraj Pratishthān.


== Writings ==
Collections of poems

Vishakha (1942)
Himaresha (1964)
Chhandomayi (1982)
Jeewanalahari (1933)
Jaicha Kunja (1936)
Samidha (1947)
Kana (1952)Marathi Mati (1960)
Wadalwel (1969)
Rasyatra (1969)
Muktayan (1984)
Shrawan (1985)
Prawasi Pakshi (1989)
Patheya (1989)
Meghdoot (1956 Marathi translation of Kalidas' Meghdoot, which is in Sanskrit)
Swagat (1962)
Balbodh Mevyatil Kusumagraj (1989)Edited collections of poems

Kāwyawāhini
Sāhityasuwarna
Pimpalapān
Chandanawel
Rasyātrā, poems chosen by Shankar Vaidya and Poet Borkar, and with a long scholarly introduction by VaidyaCollections of stories

Phulawāli
Chhote Āni Mothe
Satāriche Bol Āni Iter Kathā
Kāhi Wruddha, Kāhi Tarun
Prem Āni Mānjar
Appointment
Āhe Āni Nāhi
Wirāmachinhe
Pratisād
Ekāki Tārā
Wātewaralyā Sāwalyā
Shakespearechyā Shodhāt
Roopareshā
Kusumāgrajānchyā Bārā Kathā
Jādoochi Hodi (for children)Plays

Yayāti Āni Dewayāni
Weeja Mhanāli Dharateelā
Natsamrāt
Doorche Diwe
Dusarā Peshwā
Waijayanti
Kounteya
Rājmukut
Āmche Nāw Bāburāo
Widushak
Ek Hoti Wāghin
Ānand
Mukhyamantri
Chandra Jithe Ugawat Nāhi
Mahant
Kaikeyi
Becket (translation of The Honour of God by Jean Anouilh)One-act plays

Diwāni Dāwā
Dewāche Ghar
Prakāshi Dāre
Sangharsh
Bet
Natak Basat Āhe Āni Itar EkānkikāNovels

Waishnawa
Jānhawi
Kalpanechyā Teerāwar


== Works in translation ==
The Saint in  the Cellar: selected poems. Tr. by S. A. Virkar. New Native Press, 2003. ISBN 1-883197-18-X.


== Visualisation of works of Kusumagraj ==
The translation of Meghadūta by Kusumagraj was visualised by watercolour artist Nana Joshi. These visualisations were published in the Menaka Diwali issue in 1979.Natsamrat, a play written by V.V. Shirwadkar for which he won several accolades, was also adapted on screen by director Mahesh Manjrekar with veteran actor Nana Patekar as Natsamrat (2016), after successful runs of the play's theatre adaptations.


== See also ==
Marathi Language Day


== References ==


== External links ==
(Marathi website)
(Marathi website)
Marathi Bhasha Diwas

In Marathi literature, Ajram created literary works. Or. It has come to light that many times more literature has been neglected than the published literature of Shirwadkar and Kusumagraj. 
While this neglected literature was in the city, neither the rulers nor the establishment established in the name of Kusumagraj wanted to take notice of it. Kusumagraj wrote extensively in all genres of Marathi literature. It includes all types of stories, poems, plays, one-act plays, children's literature.
Vs. Or. Before writing under the name Shirwadkar, Kusumagraj also wrote extensively under the name of Gajanan Ranganath Shirwadkar of Purvashram. However, only the literature published in the form of his book came before the public. Literary genres like essays, personifications, travelogues, children's poems written by him are still neglected and uncollected. In this literature 189 poems, 13 children's poems are ignored