Ted Shapiro (October 31, 1899 – May 26, 1980) was a United States popular music composer, pianist, and sheet music publisher.


== Early life ==
Shapiro was born in New York City. He became a Tin Pan Alley songwriter and accompanied notable star vaudeville singers of the day, including Nora Bayes and Eva Tanguay.  In 1921 he was hired as accompanist and music director for Sophie Tucker. Shapiro worked with Tucker for the rest of her life, appearing at the piano on stage with her, exchanging banter and wisecracks between songs. Shapiro also wrote a number of songs for Tucker.


== Popular compositions ==
Ted Shapiro became a member of ASCAP in 1924.  His biggest hits were the holiday standard "Winter Weather" from 1941, and "If I Had You", first published in 1928, which continues to be covered by new recording artists and used in movie soundtracks into the 21st century. His other successful tunes and songs include "He's Home for a Little While", "A Handful of Stars", "To You", written with Tommy Dorsey and Benny Davis, "Far Away Island", "Sitting in the Sand A-Sunnin'", "Now I'm In Love", ""You'll Be Reminded of Me", "Starlight Souvenirs", "This is No Dream", "Dog on the Piano", "Puttin' On the Dog", "Waitin' for Katy", and "Ask Anyone in Love".


== Personal ==
Ted Shapiro was one of at least three children of Joseph and Jennie Shapiro.  His parents were Jewish immigrants from Kovno, Russia (now Kaunas, Lithuania).  He was married twice, the first time being to Joan Max of Miami, FL and the second to Susan Seippel Shapiro.
Some of his songs were written in collaboration with his wife Susan Shapiro (b. November 4, 1923), an accomplished jewelry designer, who owned and operated a store called Trifles and Treasures on Kane Concourse in Bay Harbor Islands, Florida. Ted adopted Susan's three children: John, Lynn and Jennifer. John and Lynn are Susan's biological children, while Jennifer was adopted. He was loved and adored by them.
Ted Shapiro died at age 80 in Bay Harbor, Florida.


== References ==