Tan Sri Datuk Amar Teuku Zakaria Bin Teuku Nyak Puteh (later  Ramlee Bin Puteh) (22 March 1929 – 29 May 1973), better known by his stage name P. Ramlee (Puteh Ramlee), was a Malaysian actor, filmmaker, musician, and composer. Due to his contributions to the film and music industry and his literary work, which began with his acting debut in Singapore in 1948, to the height of his career and then later moving to Malaysia in 1964 to his decline and death, he is regarded as a prominent icon of Malay entertainment. His fame has reached as far as Brunei, Indonesia, as well as in Hong Kong and Japan.


== Early life ==
Ramlee was born on 22 March 1929 to Teuku Nyak Puteh Bin Teuku Karim (1902–1955) and Che Mah Binti Hussein (1904–1967). His father, Teuku Nyak Puteh, is a decendant of a wealthy family in Aceh, travelled from Lhokseumawe in Aceh, Indonesia, to settle in Penang, where his father married his mother, who is hailed from Kubang Buaya, Butterworth.
Ramlee received his education from the Sekolah Melayu Kampung Jawa (Kampung Jawa Malay School), Francis Light English School and then to Penang Free School; in all he was registered as "Ramlee" in school by his father, because his name Teuku Zakaria was not suitable with other children at that time. Reportedly a reluctant and naughty student, Ramlee was nevertheless talented and interested in music and football. His studies at the Penang Free School was interrupted by the Japanese occupation from 1942 to 1945, during which he enrolled in the Japanese navy school (Kaigun Gakko). He also learnt the basics of music and to sing Japanese songs during this period with his teacher known as Hirahe-san. When the war ended, he took music lessons that enabled him to read musical notations.


== Career ==

Ramlee's first screen appearance was in 1948's Chinta, a B. S. Rajhans-directed film produced by Malay Film Productions. Between 1948 and 1955, he has starred in a total of 27 films. He eventually ventured into film directing under the mentoring of Madras-born director L. Krishnan.


== Death and legacy ==

Before dawn of 29 May 1973, P. Ramlee died at the age of 44 from a heart attack and was buried at Jalan Ampang Muslim Cemetery, in Kuala Lumpur.In 1986, 13 years after his death, in honour of his contributions to the Malaysian entertainment industry, the P. Ramlee Memorial or Pustaka Peringatan P. Ramlee was built in his home in Setapak, Kuala Lumpur. In 1982, the street Jalan Parry, in the center of Kuala Lumpur, was renamed Jalan P. Ramlee in his honour. In 1990, he was posthumously awarded the Malaysian honorific title Tan Sri, and then in 2009, the honorific title of "Datuk Amar" by Sarawak State Government. Then Chief Minister of Sarawak, Abdul Taib Mahmud, an avid fan of  Ramlee, presented the award to his adopted daughter, Dian P. Ramlee, in a ceremony honouring veteran artists in Kuching.The P. Ramlee House is a museum situated along Jalan P. Ramlee (formerly Caunter Hall road) in Penang, Malaysia. The building is a restored wooden house that was originally built in 1926 by his father and uncle. The house had previously undergone multiple repairs before being taken over by the National Archives as an extension of its P. Ramlee Memorial project in Kuala Lumpur. Items on display at the house include personal memorabilia related to his life in Penang and items belonging to his family.On 22 March 2017; his 88th birthday, Google honored P. Ramlee with a Doodle on the Malaysian Google homepage.In 2021, Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) honored him with their limited-time menu, the Burger P. Ramlee — a combination between KFC Zinger and P. Ramlee's favourite dish, the Nasi Kandar where it available in four combos — À'la Carte, Kombo, Set Legenda and Kombo Ikon.


== Filmography ==

P. Ramlee composed a total of 401 songs and was involved in 66 films throughout his career.


== Awards ==
 Malaysia :
 Member of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (AMN) (1962)
 Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia (PSM) – Tan Sri (1990; posthumously)
P. Ramlee was posthumously granted the sobriquet Seniman Agung.
 Sarawak :
 Knight Commander of the Order of the Star of Hornbill Sarawak (DA) – Datuk Amar (2009; posthumously)


== Entities named after P. Ramlee ==

Various places are named after Ramlee

Jalan P. Ramlee, Penang (formerly known as Caunter Hall; renamed on 30 August 1983)
Jalan P. Ramlee, Kuala Lumpur (formerly known as Jalan Parry; renamed in 1982)
Bangunan P. Ramlee and Bilik Mesyuarat Tan Sri P. Ramlee at Sekolah Kebangsaan Hulu Klang, Selangor (used as background in Masam Masam Manis)
Jalan P. Ramlee, Kuching, Sarawak (formerly known as Jalan Jawa)
Taman P. Ramlee (formerly Taman Furlong) a townships at Setapak, Kuala Lumpur and George Town, Penang
Pawagam Mini P. Ramlee at Studio Merdeka, FINAS, Ulu Klang, Selangor
Makmal P.Ramlee at Filem Negara Malaysia, Petaling Jaya, Selangor
P. Ramlee Auditorium (formerly known as RTM Auditorium), Angkasapuri
SK Tan Sri P. Ramlee, Georgetown, Penang (formerly SK Kampung Jawa, his alma mater; renamed on 13 November 2011)
Ramlee Mall at Suria KLCC shopping centre, Kuala Lumpur
Bukit Nanas Monorail station, Kuala Lumpur, formerly known as P. Ramlee Monorail station
Auditorium P. Ramlee, RTM Kuching, Sarawak


== References ==


== External links ==
P.Ramlee's Profile, sinemamalaysia.com.my (Malay language)
P. Ramlee Cyber Museum
P. Ramlee: Namamu Dijulang, Jasamu Dikenang Astro special tribute Program, October 2010
P. Ramlee at IMDb