Andrei Aleksandrovich Mironov (Russian: Андре́й Алекса́ндрович Миро́нов; March 7, 1941 – August 16, 1987) was a Soviet and Russian stage and film actor who played lead roles in some of the most popular Soviet films, such as The Diamond Arm, Beware of the Car and Twelve Chairs. Mironov was also a popular singer.


== Early life ==
Mironov was born in Moscow to Maria Mironova, a Russian, and Aleksandr Menaker, a Russian Jew. Both his parents were also actors.


== Career ==
Mironov studied in the Vakhtangov Theatre School during the early 1950s. From 1958 to 1962, he studied acting at the Moscow Shchukin School. From June 18, 1962, to 1987, Mironov was a permanent member of the trope at the Moscow Theatre of Satire. In 1961, he acted in his first film What If This Is Love? On December 18, 1980, he was awarded the title of People's Artist of the RSFSR. He also received the Medal "For Labour Valour".

Andrei Mironov is known and loved for his roles in films made by Eldar Ryazanov, Leonid Gaidai, Mark Zakharov, and other directors. He had a wide comedic range and played diverse roles (e.g. a Soviet bureaucrat, Figaro, a romantic spy, a member of the intelligentsia, a con man, an American movie pioneer, a tale-teller, etc.).
On one of his tours through Latvia in 1987, he lost consciousness on stage while performing the lead role in The Marriage of Figaro. Thinking he was having a heart attack, the other actors hastily administered oral nitroglycerin, a drug commonly given to heart attack patients, but which can cause life threatening complications when mistakenly given to those suffering from cerebrovascular disease. He was driven to a hospital where two days later he was pronounced dead. His death occurred only eleven days after the passing of his close friend and frequent co-star Anatoli Papanov. The cause of his death was excessive internal brain bleeding due to a congenital cerebral aneurysm following many years of heavy smoking.


== Personal life ==
Mironov's parents, Aleksandr Menaker and Maria Vladimirovna Mironova, were known nationwide as a comedic duo. He was married twice. First to Yekaterina Gradova, with whom he had one daughter, Maria Mironova, and second to Larisa Golubkina, a singer and actress best known for her role of the hussar maiden in Hussar Ballad. Maria Mironova and his adopted daughter Maria Golubkina (from his marriage with Larisa) had successful careers in Russian cinema.
He had survived a stroke in 1981 and a bout of meningitis that left him in pain and with blisters on his abdomen for the rest of his life, but fought through it and continued acting until his death.


== Legacy ==
A minor planet 3624 Mironov, discovered by Soviet astronomers Lyudmila Karachkina and Lyudmila Zhuravleva in 1982 is named after him.


== Partial filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
The Official web site of Andrei Mironov (in Russian)
Andrei Mironov (in Russian)
Andrei Mironov at IMDb
Andrei Mironov on YouTube
Peter Rollberg, Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Cinema. 2008, ISBN 0-8108-6072-4; pp. 456–457