Paliyath Jayachandrakuttan, often credited  as P. Jayachandran, or Jayachandran is an Indian playback singer and classical musician from Kerala. Jayachandran is best known for his captivating voice which gave him the title Bhava Gayakan by the music fraternity of South India. He has worked under all famous music directors like G Devarajan, MS Baburaj, V Dakshinamoorthy, K Raghavan, MS Viswanathan, Ilaiyaraaja, Vidya sagar, AR Rahman, MM Keeravani, MK Arjunan,  Shyam etc.
He has sung almost 15000 songs in total in different languages.[1]


== Early life ==
Jayachandran was born in Bhadralayam at Ravipuram, Kochi on 3 March 1944 and his family later moved to Irinjalakuda. He is the third of five children of the late Ravivarma Kochaniyan Thampuran, a member of Cochin royal family, who was himself a musician, though never a professional singer and the late Paliyath Subhadrakkunjamma, and also the second of their three sons. His sibligs were late Sudhakaran (1940-1989), late Sarasija (1942- 2018), Krishnakumar (b. 1946) and Jayanthi (b. 1949).
Jayachandran married Lalitha from Thrissur in May 1973. They have a daughter named Lakshmi and a son named Dinanath, who also sang for films.


== Career ==
Jayachandran graduated from Christ College, Irinjalakuda. He was a student of the National High School, Irinjalakuda from where he received many prizes for playing the mridangam and light music in the State School Youth Festival. Jayachandran met Yesudas in 1958 when he participated in the state youth festival. Yesudas won the Best Classical Singer award and Jayachandran got the best mridamgist award in the same year.
Jayachandran has won one National Award, five Kerala State Awards and four Tamil Nadu State Awards. He has recorded songs in Malayalam, Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Hindi.
In 1967, he sang the evergreen song "Anuragaganam pole", composed by M.S. Baburaj, for the film Udhyogastha, directed by P. Venu. Later together, P. Venu and Jayachandran produced more hits like "Ninmaniarayile" C.I.D. Nazir 1971 and "Malayala Bashathan" Prethangalude Thazhvara 1973. Jayachandran received the Kerala State Film Award for Best Singer in 1972 for the song "Neelagiriyude ('Suprabhaatham')" for the film Panitheeratha Veedu. Its music was done by M. S. Viswanathan. The year 1978 brought him another Kerala State award, this time for the song "Ragam Sreeragam" from the film Bandhanam, composed by M. B. Sreenivasan. In 1985 he received the National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer for the song "Sivasankara Sarva Saranya Vibho" from the film Sree Narayana Guru, composed by G. Devarajan . The song "Prayam Nammil", from the film Niram, brought him a third Kerala state award in 1998. In 2015 he received the next state award for his songs in Jilebi and Ennu ninte Moideen 46th Kerala State Film Awards.In 1975, he sang for the Malayalam movie Penpada (with music by R. K. Shekhar) a song called "Velli then Kinnam Pol", regarded as the first composition of the then 9-year-old Dileep Shekhar, now more widely known as A. R. Rahman.Jayachandran worked in close collaboration with the composer Ilayaraja, producing numerous popular hits in the Tamil language, including "Raasaathi Unna", "Kaathirundhu Kaathirundhu" (both from the 1984 release Vaidhegi kaathirundhaal), "Mayanginen Solla Thayanginen" (from the 1985 release Naaney raaja naaney mandhiri), "Vaalkaiye Vesham" (from the 1979 release Aarilirundhu Arubathu Varai), "Poova Eduthu Oru" (from the 1986 release Amman Kovil Kizhakaaley) and "Thaalaattudhey Vaanam" (from the 1981 release Kadal Meengal). In 1994, he received the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Singer for the song "Kathazham Kattuvazhi" for the film Kizhakku Cheemayile, composed by A. R. Rahman. As a recognition for his contribution to Tamil film music, he was honoured with the 1997 Kalaimamani award of the Tamil Nadu Government.
Jayachandran was honoured with the Swaralaya Kairali Yesudas award at the beginning of 2001, which he was the first person to receive. The motive behind this award is to choose the best from the singers and lyricists within a span of 30 years. He has sung nearly 1000 songs for Malayalam movies over the years, according to the MSI information database.
Jayachandran sang in Hindi for the first time in 2008 for the movie ADA...A Way of Life along with Alka Yagnik, with music scored by A. R. Rahman.


== Tamil Songs ==


== Tamil Christian Devotional Songs ==
"Uravodu Vaazhum" – Deiva Tharisanam
"Nanbanukkaga" – Deiva Tharisanam
"Amaidhiyin Thoothanay" – '
"Enathu Vizhiyil Unathu Paarvai" – '
"Amaithi Thedi Alaiyum Nenjame" – Paathai


== Kannada and Malayalam ==
"Manjalayil Mungi Thorthi" – Kalithozhan (Malayalam)
"Kamala Nayana Kamala Vadhana" – Bhaktha Prahladha (Kannada)
"Therirangum Mukile" – Mazhathullikilukkam (Malayalam)
"Ammaye Orakanta" - Neetho Cheppalani (Telugu)
"Olanjali Kuruvi" – 1983 (Malayalam)
"Ithaloornnu Veena" – Thanmathra (Malayalam)
"Olavina Udugore Kodalenu" – Olavina Udugore (Kannada)
"Milo Wahan Wahan (from movie ADA, Debut song in Hindi)
"Harshbashpam Thooki" - "Muthassi"(Malayalam)
"Ariyathe Ariyathe" - "Ravanaprabhu" (Malayalam)
""Pattil Ee Pattil" - "Pranayam"  (Malayalam)
"Sharadambaram " - "Ennu Ninte Moideen"  (Malayalam)
"Jeevana Sanjeevana" - Hanthakana Sanchu (Kannada)
"Mannappm chuttu" - Marubhoomiyile Aana (Malayalam)
"Podi meesha" - Pa Va (Malayalam)
"Hindusthanvu endu mareyada" - Amrutha Ghalige (Kannada)
"Mandara Pushpavu Neenu" - Ranganayaki (Kannada)
"Chanda Chanda" - Maanasa Sarovara (Kannada)
"Neeyoru Puzhayayi"- Thilakkam (Malayalam)
"Poove Poove" - "Devadoothan" (Malayalam)
"Aaru Paranju" - "Pulival Kalyanam" (Malayalam)
"Mazhavannu" - Puzhikkadakan (Malayalam)
"Kalabhachuvaru Vecha Meda" - Aval Oru Thudar Katha (Malayalam)


== Malayalam music albums ==
Pranayamarmaram – 2009.


== Awards ==
National Film Awards
1986 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the Malayalam film Sree Narayana GuruKerala State Film Awards
1972 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the song "Suprabhatham" in the film Pani Theeratha Veedu
1978 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the song "Ragam Sreeragam" in the film Bandhanam
1999 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the song "Prayam Nammil" in the film Niram
2004 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the song "Neeyoru Puzhayaay" in the film Thilakkam
2015 – Best Male Play Back Singer for the songs "Njaan Oru Malayali", "Malarvaka Kombathu", "Sharadambaram" in the films Jilebi, Ennum Eppozhum, Ennu Ninte MoideenTamil Nadu State Film Awards
1994 – Best Male Playback Singer – for the song "Kattazham Kattuvazhi" in the film Kizhakku Cheemayile
1997 – Kalaimamani award by Tamil Nadu Government for 30 Years in Tamil Film MusicAsianet Film Awards
2001 – Best Male Playback – Raavanaprabhu
1999 – Best Male Playback – NiramOther awards2000 – Swaralaya Kairali Yesudas Award
2014 – Harivarasanam Award
2015 – Kerala Film Critics Association Award for Best Male Playback Singer - Sharadambaram (Ennu Ninte Moideen)
2017 – Mazhavil Mango Music Award for Best Singer - Podimeesha (Pa Va)


== Telugu Discography ==


== Kannada Discography ==
"Kamala nayana": Bhakta Prahlada (1983 film)


== Filmography ==
.Nakashatangal- As Neighbour- Directed by Hariharan .Travancore Lodge -As Narayanan Nair- Directed by VK Prakash 


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
P. Jayachandran at IMDb