Elsa Viveca Torstensdotter Lindfors (December 29, 1920 – October 25, 1995) was a Swedish-born American stage, film, and  television actress. She won an Emmy Award and a Silver Bear for Best Actress.


== Biography ==
Lindfors was born in Uppsala, Sweden, the daughter of Karin Emilia Therese (née Dymling) and Axel Torsten Lindfors.She trained at the Royal Dramatic Training Academy, Stockholm. Soon after, she became a theater and film star in Sweden. She moved to the United States in 1946 after being signed by Warner Bros., and began working in Hollywood. She appeared in more than 100 films, including Night Unto Night, No Sad Songs for Me, Dark City, The Halliday Brand, King of Kings, An Affair of the Skin, Creepshow, The Sure Thing, and Stargate. She appeared with actors including Ronald Reagan, Jeffrey Hunter, Charlton Heston, Lizabeth Scott, and Errol Flynn.In 1952, she appeared on Broadway alongside Edmond O'Brien in John Van Druten's I've Got Sixpence. Two years later, she made her West End debut in J. B. Priestley's poorly received play The White Countess.Lindfors appeared frequently on television, usually as a guest star, though she played the title role in the miniseries Frankenstein's Aunt. Most of her TV appearances were in the 1950s and 1960s, with a resurgence in the 1980s and early 1990s. In 1990, she won an Emmy Award for her guest appearance on the series Life Goes On. She was nominated for an Emmy in 1978 for her supporting role in the TV movie A Question of Guilt.In 1962, she shared the Silver Bear for Best Actress award with Rita Gam at the Berlin Film Festival, for their performances in Tad Danielewski's No Exit. Among her later film roles, perhaps the most memorable is the kindly and worldly wise Professor Taub in The Sure Thing (1985).In the last years of her life, she taught acting at the School of Visual Arts in  Manhattan, and had a lead role (essentially playing herself) in Henry Jaglom's Last Summer in the Hamptons (1995). The same year, she returned to the Strindberg Festival in Stockholm to perform in the play In Search of Strindberg.


== Personal life ==
Lindfors was married four times, to Swedish cinematographer Harry Hasso,  Swedish attorney and World Chess Federation president Folke Rogard, director Don Siegel, and Hungarian writer, producer, and director George Tabori. She had three children – two sons (John Tabori with Hasso, and  actor Kristoffer Tabori, with Siegel) and a daughter (Lena Tabori, with Rogard).Lindfors was a naturalized U.S. citizen and a liberal Democrat, who supported the presidency of Jimmy Carter, and later said of her former co-star Ronald Reagan that "Ronnie was not a big star. He didn't carry enough weight. To think that the guy became President is really kind of funny."Viveca Lindfors died from complications of rheumatoid arthritis at the age of 74 in Uppsala., and was buried at Uppsala Gamla cemetery.


== Selected filmography ==


== Major stage appearances ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Viveca Lindfors at Svenskt kvinnobiografiskt lexikon


== External links ==
Viveca Lindfors at IMDb 
Viveca Lindfors at the Internet Broadway Database 
Viveca Lindfors at the Internet Off-Broadway Database 
Viveca Lindfors at the University of Wisconsin's Actors Studio audio collection
Edward Winter, The FIDE President and the Actress, ChessBase.com; retrieved 2009-01-20.
Viveca Lindfors at Find a Grave 
Photographs and literature
Viveca Lindfors papers, 1945–1990, held by the Billy Rose Theatre Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts