Paravoor Govindan Devarajan (1927-2006), popularly known as G. Devarajan or Devarajan master, was an Indian music composer and Carnatic Vocalist. He scored music for more than three hundred Malayalam films, many dramas, and twenty Tamil and four Kannada movies. His collaborations with Vayalar Ramavarma produced the golden era of Malayalam film music and many of his compositions remain ever green classics in Malayalam. His music in the Tamil film Annai Velankanni has received many accolades. Devarajan received Kerala Government's Best Music Director award five times, among other honours. In 2005, he was honoured with the J. C. Daniel Award, Kerala government's highest honour for contributions to Malayalam cinema.


== Early life ==
Born at Paravur, Kollam district in Kerala to mridangist and classical singer Paravur Kochu Govindan Asan and Kochukunju as their eldest son. His grandfather, Narayanan Asan, was a Kathakali artist. 
His dad, though he was a mridangist and a disciple of Dakshinamurthy Pillai, primarily taught vocal to his students, and thus Devarajan learned Carnatic vocal adeptly from his own father through that. He additionally graduated with BA in Economics from University College, Thiruvanthapuram. 
Devarajan, under the name of Paravur Devarajan or Paravur G. Devaraj, started his illustrious career in music as a classical singer and performed his first classical concert at the age of 17 and started to perform more concerts on AIR Tiruchi and Trivandrum. He performed multiple concerts from 1947 to 1967 with multiple accompanists, his usual ones being Chalakudy Narayanaswamy and Mavelikara Krishnankutty Nair.
He was soon attracted to the Communist movement and decided to dedicate his creative energy to popular music.  He joined the once-famous drama troupe of Kerala, the Kerala People's Arts Club (KPAC). The work that brought him to the limelight was the drama song titled "Ponnarivaal ambiliyil kanneriyunnoole", written by his friend O. N. V. Kurup and composed and sung by himself. KPAC and its members had a distinctive leaning towards the communist ideology, and their dramas played a role in spreading the ideology among the Keralite masses. Through his compositions, Devarajan would cast an indelible imprint in the Malayali theatre arena, especially after the famous KPAC drama Ningalenne Communistaakki, written by Thoppil Bhasi in 1952.


== Film career ==
The first movie for which he composed music was Kaalam Maarunnu (1955). He teamed up with poet-lyricist Vayalar Ramavarma in Chathurangam in 1959. His third movie – and the second with Vayalar – Bharya (1962) became a huge hit and made them a popular combination. His collaborations with Vayalar produced the golden era of Malayalam film music. Devarajan is remembered by singers in Malayalam like K. J. Yesudas and Jayachandran as their Godfather.Devarajan was known for his use of raagas in Malayalam film music. His music embraced different styles with the Carnatic and Hindustani melody lines meeting folk idioms and Western harmony. Despite being a strong atheist, he composed devotional songs like "Harivarasanam", "Guruvayoor Ambalanadayil", "Chethi Mandaram Thulasi", and "Nithyavishudhayam Kanyamariyame", which are considered classics in that genre. Also, he is particularly noted for his remarkable ability to blend the words of the lyrics with the mood of the situation in his film song compositions. Most of his hit songs were written by Vayalar Ramavarma. The Vayalar-Devarajan combine proved the most successful team till the death of Vayalar in the mid 1970s. Hundreds of songs contributed by the team are still part of Malayalis' nostalgia. Apart from Vayalar, he has also given tunes to lyrics by other poets and songwriters like O. N. V. Kurup, P. Bhaskaran, and Sreekumaran Thampi.A complete work of Devarajan, Devageethikal, composed by himself, has released and the book is published by Authentic books.Devarajan died of a massive heart attack at his residence in Chennai at 10:30 PM IST on 14 March 2006. He was 78 at the time of his death, and was survived by his wife, two children - a daughter (elder) and a son (younger) - and some grandchildren. His body was taken airway to Thiruvananthapuram, and was cremated with state honors at Nehru Park in Paravur, his hometown.


== Filmography ==
MalayalamOmanakuttan (1964)
Bhoomidevi Pushpiniyayi (1974)
Ammini Ammavan(1976)
Vishnu Vijayam (1974)
Chattakari (1974)
Ponni (1976)
Shalini Ente Koottukari (1980)
Meen (1980)
Parankimala (1981)TamilKaaval Dheivam (1969)
Kasturi Thilakam (1970)
Annai Velankanni (1971)
Paruva Kaalam (1974)
Andharangam (1975)
Villiyanur Matha (1983)


== Awards ==
Kerala State Film Awards:

1969 – Best Music Director
1970 – Best Music Director – Thriveni
1972 – Best Music Director
1985 – Best Music Director
1991 – Best Background Music – Yamanam
1999 – J. C. Daniel Award for Lifetime Achievement Award from the Government of KeralaKerala Film Critics Association Award

1977 - Kerala Film Critics Association Award for Best Music Director
1978 - Kerala Film Critics Association Award for Best Music Director
1979 - Kerala Film Critics Association Award for Best Music Director


== References ==


== External links ==
Type a message
Hindu online, Soaring on the wings of poetry
Hindu online, Music from the heart
Hindu online, Ode to a legend
Songs Composed for Malayalam Movies
Malayalam music orphaned – (Sunday Kaumudi)
R.I.P. G. Devarajan Master
Devarajan Master
G Devarajan at MSI
All Malayalam Movie Songs Composed by G Devarajan at MSI
All Malayalam Non Movie Songs Composed by G Devarajan at MSI
An interview with Devarajan Master
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/kozhikode/remembering-a-master-composer/article6460893.ece