Reine Davies (born Irene Douras; June 6, 1883 – April 5, 1938) was an American singer and actress.


== Life and career ==
Davies was born on June 6, 1883, in Brooklyn, New York, the daughter of Bernard J. Douras, a lawyer and judge in New York City; and Rose Reilly. Her father performed the civil marriage of socialite Gloria Gould Bishop. The eldest sister of actress Marion Davies, Reine was the first of the Douras daughters to start using the name Davies. One day she was driving through the Brooklyn neighborhood, and saw the office sign of Valentine Davies. She liked the name and adopted it, and the other sisters followed suit.
Davies married twice, first to director George Lederer from January 12, 1908; until they divorced in 1912, and later to actor George Regas. She had a son with Lederer, director/writer Charles Lederer, and a daughter, Josephine Rose ("Pepi") Lederer.
She was known as "The New American Beauty," and, by her friends as, "The True Blue Girl". Reine Davies lived for many years in Chicago, and was on the Vaudeville circuit as a singer and actress. She appeared in the 1915 movie Sunday as Sunday and in 1917 as Beth Winthrop in The Sin Woman. She was also a popular subject on sheet music covers, most famously for "Meet Me Tonight in Dreamland" (which she introduced), as well as "The Reine Waltz" (1910), "When I Kissed Your Tears Away" (1911), "Leaf by Leaf the Roses Fall" (1911), "When I Met You Last Night in Dreamland" (1912), "In the Palace of Dreams" (1914), and "Araby" (1915). For many years she edited the gossip column in the Los Angeles Examiner.
In 1935, Davies began writing a column about Hollywood social events for The San Francisco Examiner.Davies died on April 5, 1938, in Beverly Hills, California, from a heart attack in a swimming pool. She was buried with a Requiem Mass at St. Augustine's Church in Culver City, California, and interred in the Douras Mausoleum in what is now Hollywood Forever Cemetery.


== See also ==
1886 in film


== References ==


== External links ==
Reine Davies at IMDb
Reine Davies at the Internet Broadway Database
Reine Davies at Find a Grave