Bowen Charlton "Sonny" Tufts III (July 16, 1911 – June 4, 1970) was an American stage, film, and television actor. He is best known for the films he made as a contract star at Paramount in the 1940s, including So Proudly We Hail!. He also starred in the cult classic Cat-Women of the Moon.


== Early life and family ==
Bowen Charlton Tufts III (some sources give "Charleston") (nicknamed "Sonny") was born in Boston into a prominent banking family, the son of Octavia Emily (Williams) and Bowen Charlton Tufts. The Tufts family patriarch, Peter Tufts, sailed to America from Wilby, Norfolk, England in 1638. His granduncle was businessman and philanthropist Charles Tufts, for whom Tufts University is named.Tufts attended the Phillips Exeter Academy, He later broke with the family banking tradition by not studying business at Harvard, choosing instead to study opera at Yale University, where he was an editor of campus humor magazine The Yale Record. He was a member of the Skull and Bones society and played for the Yale football team. Tufts also performed in a musical group, the Whiffenpoofs, and toured with the group in Europe.
While touring in Naples, Tufts decided to study opera. He studied opera in Paris for a year and in the United States for three.


== Career ==
After graduating from Yale in 1935, Tufts auditioned with the Metropolitan Opera in New York City, but eventually worked on the Broadway stage. He appeared in the stage show Who's Who and Sing for Your Supper (1939). Tufts then began singing in hotels and nightclubs.


=== Paramount ===
A Yale classmate of Tufts' later convinced him to move to Hollywood to begin a career as an actor. Upon arriving in Hollywood, Tufts' friend, hotel manager Jack Donnelly, accompanied Tufts to Paramount Pictures and introduced him to a casting director Joe Egli. Egli shot a screen test with Tufts, who was then signed to Paramount.

His first role was as Kansas, an affable Marine and love interest of Paulette Goddard in the 1943 World War II romantic drama So Proudly We Hail!. The film was a critical and box-office hit, largely due to the three female leads: Claudette Colbert, Paulette Goddard, and Veronica Lake. Tufts' performance was praised by critics and the role served as a launching pad for his career. After the release of the film, Tufts received 1700 fan letters a week and was named "The Find of 1943."Due to an old college football injury, Tufts was one of the few male actors not serving overseas in the war. He was borrowed by RKO, which was looking for a leading man to support Olivia de Havilland in the comedy Government Girl (1944); Paramount got Maureen O'Hara in exchange. (This meant he had to drop out of Standing Room Only; he was replaced by Fred MacMurray.) The film was a huge hit and Tufts was voted the number one "Star of Tomorrow" by exhibitors for 1944.Before filming of So Proudly We Hail! was complete, director Mark Sandrich commissioned So Proudly's screenwriter Allan Scott to write a vehicle for Tufts and his co-star Paulette Goddard. That film, entitled I Love a Soldier (1944) was a mild hit.
Sandrich directed Tufts' next film, Here Come the Waves (1944), which was a huge success, due in part to stars Bing Crosby and Betty Hutton. Sandrich died in 1945.
Tufts made another musical comedy Bring On the Girls (1945) with Eddie Bracken and Veronica Lake, replacing Dick Powell. Tufts sang several songs, but the film was a box-office disappointment. He made a cameo along with most Paramount stars in Duffy's Tavern (1945), singing "Swinging on a Star".
He was reunited with Lake in Miss Susie Slagle's (1946) alongside Joan Caulfield.
Paramount tried him in a Western The Virginian (1946), though it was in a supporting role. He was reunited with De Havilland in The Well-Groomed Bride (1946), replacing Dennis O'Keefe but she wound up with Ray Milland at the end of the film. However, Paramount did give Tufts the star part in Swell Guy (1946) opposite Ann Blyth. He also got to co star opposite Betty Hutton in Cross My Heart (1946).
Tufts was the romantic male lead in Easy Come, Easy Go (1947), a Barry Fitzgerald vehicle. It was directed by John Farrow, who also used Tufts in Blaze of Noon (1947) playing one of four brothers who fly. After a cameo in Variety Girl (1947), Tufts left Paramount.


=== Freelance actor ===
He starred in a Western, The Untamed Breed (1948). He was in a thriller with John Payne, The Crooked Way (1949) where he played a villain. He was Victor Mature's friend in Easy Living (1949) at RKO. He was arrested for public drunkenness in 1950. and 1951.By the early 1950s, Tufts' popularity began to wane and his career began to decline. He separated from his wife in 1951 and she divorced him in 1952, saying his drinking had become "intolerable". He was unemployed for a year until he received an offer from Britain to make The Gift Horse (1952) with Richard Attenborough.In 1953, Tufts was cast opposite Barbara Payton in the low-budget comedy film Run for the Hills. Later that year, he was in No Escape and starred in another low-budget film, Cat-Women of the Moon, which became a cult classic. He had the lead in the low-budget Serpent Island (1954).


=== Assaults ===
Tufts' career decline was compounded by his alcoholism and his off-screen antics. In March 1954, a stripper named Barbara Gray Atkins sued Tufts for $25,000 in damages after she claimed he bit her left thigh while his two friends and he were visiting her home. Atkins later dropped the lawsuit against Tufts.In April 1954, a 19-year-old dancer named Margarie Von accused Tufts of biting her on the right thigh while she was relaxing aboard a yacht docked off the coast of Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach. Von sued Tufts for $26,000, claiming the bite left a three-inch scar. Von later settled for $600. In August 1955, a third complaint was lodged against Tufts when Adrienne Fromann claimed the actor beat and bruised her at a restaurant. She demanded $20,000 in damages."He drinks too much and lives too lavishly", said his ex-wife Barbara.Tufts' career briefly rebounded when he was cast in a small role in the comedy The Seven Year Itch (1955), starring Tom Ewell and Marilyn Monroe. In 1956, Tufts had a supporting role in drama Come Next Spring for Republic Pictures. He was in "A Tale of Two Citizens" for Damon Runyon Theatre (1956). After filming The Parson and the Outlaw in 1957, and being arrested for public drunkenness again, Tufts retreated to a ranch in Texas.


=== Later career ===
In 1962, he returned to Hollywood to produce and star in a film All the Way about paratroopers. It was not made.
Tufts returned to acting in 1963 with a guest appearance on The Virginian playing the father of Trampas (Doug McClure) and in a Bob Hope TV special Have Girls Will Travel (1964). He was in Town Tamer (1965) and "The Ordeal of Bud Windom" on The Loner (1965) with Lloyd and Jeff Bridges. His final onscreen roles were Cottonpickin' Chickenpickers (1967) and the 1968 television movie Land's End. He appeared several times as himself in Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In in 1968.


== Personal life ==

In 1938, Tufts married Spanish dancer Barbara Dare. They separated in 1949, and Dare filed for divorce in 1951, citing Tufts' excessive drinking as the reason for the breakup of their marriage. Dare was granted an interlocutory divorce on October 21, 1951 which was final the following year.


== Death ==
On June 4, 1970, Tufts died of pneumonia at age 58 at St. John's Hospital in Santa Monica, California. Tufts' private funeral was held on June 7 in Beverly Hills after which he was buried in Munroe Cemetery in Lexington, Massachusetts.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Sonny Tufts at the Internet Broadway Database 
Sonny Tufts at IMDb
Don't Drink and Act (Movie Morlocks on Sonny Tufts)
Sonny Tufts at Find a Grave