Dieter "Didi" Hallervorden (born 5 September 1935) is a German comedian, actor, singer and cabaret artist.


== Biography ==
Dieter Hallervorden's mother was a physician's assistant and his father a graduate engineer employed by German aircraft maker Junkers. His siblings are called Renate and Margot. Dieter Hallervorden has two children (Dieter Hallervorden Jr. and Nathalie Hallervorden) from his marriage to Rotraud Schindler, a daughter (Laura) from another relationship, and a son (Johannes) from his current wife Elena Blume.
Dieter Hallervorden Jr. appeared in the movies Darf ich Sie zur Mutter machen (1968) and The Wedding Trip (1969) and was a cast member on the comedy show Nonstop Nonsens (1974–1980). Nathalie Hallervorden co-starred in the TV series Die Nervensäge (1985–1986) and had a brief appearance together with her parents in  Nonstop Nonsens. Hallervorden's first wife, Rotraud Schindler, co-starred in several TV shows and some movies. Johannes Hallervorden plays the part of Melchior von und zu Panke, the ghost from the TV series Binny and the Ghost.
Hallervorden starred as a bumbling, Clouseau-like detective in the German television show Die Didi-Show. The show was dubbed into English, retitled Didi's Comedy Show, and shown in various countries. Hallervorden also released a number of music singles, often parodies of popular songs, among them Du, die Wanne ist voll, a very successful parody cover of You're the One That I Want.
An Afrikaans-subtitled version of the comedy sketch-show, Nonstop Nonsens (1975), starring Hallervorden, was broadcast in South Africa in the early 1980s under the title Grapjas Didi ("Didi the Joker" or alternatively "Didi the Prankster").  Also a Spanish-dubbed version was also distributed for Latin America under the name Las Locuras de Didí ("The Madnesses of Didi").
In recent years, Hallervorden was popular with the leading roles in the comedy-drama films Back on Track and Head Full of Honey. He provided the voice for Vlad in the German dub of Hotel Transylvania 2.
Since 1988, Dieter Hallervorden has lived in Trégastel (France) in the castle, Château de Costaérès.


== Filmography ==


== TV shows ==


== Awards ==
1981 Bambi (for his role in Nonstop Nonsens)
1996 Telestar (Best Host in "Verstehen Sie Spaß?")
2003 Deutscher Comedypreis (Honorary Award)
2005 Bayerischer Kabarettpreis (Honorary Award)
2006 Honorary Citizen of the German city Dessau
2013 Goldene Kamera (for his lifework, Honorary Award)


== References ==
"Dieter Hallervorden – Jahrgang 1935" (in German). MITTELDEUTSCHER RUNDFUNK. 5 April 2009. Archived from the original on 18 March 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2010.
Anke Ziemer. "Prominente Alumni: Dieter Hallervorden" (in German). Freie Universität Berlin. Archived from the original on 15 August 2007. Retrieved 7 December 2010.


== External links ==
More info and some videos (in German)
Official site of the German Hallervorden DVD-Distributor (with forum)
Dieter Hallervorden at IMDb