Terry David Mulligan (born June 30, 1942) is a Canadian actor and radio and television personality based in Vancouver, British Columbia.


== Life and career ==
Born in New Westminster, British Columbia, Mulligan worked as a Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) officer in Olds, Alberta, and Red Deer, Alberta, from 1960 through 1964. After leaving the Mounties, Mulligan worked as a radio disc jockey for 20 years, he hosted a TV show on Global TV called The New Quiz Kids, and then joined CBC Television as host of the music video series Good Rockin' Tonite (simultaneously, he was also a regular on the children's TV series Zig Zag, produced by BCTV). He left the CBC in 1985 to become a VJ and producer for MuchMusic West – a show he created, covering primarily the West Coast music scene as host of the long-running Much West series. At the same time he also hosted Movie Television for CityTV. His stories and MT provided years of support for the Canadian TV and film industry.
He was a program host and producer for the Canadian entertainment channel Star!. He also hosts two weekly radio programs on Alberta public radio station CKUA: Mulligan Stew, a long-running two-hour music program, and Tasting Room Radio, a one-hour weekly food and wine radio program about food, wine and winemakers, and with a rock and roll attitude. Tasting Room Radio is also broadcast on CKFR AM 1150 in Kelowna, British Columbia, and CKST AM 1040 in Vancouver.
Mulligan is a prolific character actor who has been featured in supporting and small roles in many movies and television series including, notably, The Accused, The X-Files, Millennium, Robson Arms, Hard Core Logo, and the 2005 Fantastic Four movie. Most films and TV shows in which he appears are filmed in the Vancouver area.
For his work in arts and entertainment broadcasting Mulligan has been awarded a Lifetime Achievement Award from the West Coast Awards show The Leos. He's also been inducted into the BC Entertainment Hall of Fame. Mulligan was named "Broadcaster of the Year" for 2011 by the British Columbia Association of Broadcasters.
He has four children, Mindy, Sean, Fynn, and Kate; and three grandchildren, Kyle, Taleigha, and Avelyn. He has been married since 1977 to Meg Mulligan. Their children sometimes appear on Mulligan Stew. In an August 2007 radio interview on Sounds like Canada, Kate and her father discussed an article by Kate, published in The Tyee, called "Growing up Mulligan", an humorous account of life with Mulligan.
Mulligan also co-hosts a show about wine called Hollywood & Vines with fellow actor Jason Priestley which is filmed at wine vineyards around the world. The show is seen in 180 countries via Travel Channel UK (London) and Super Channel in Canada. The third year of the series is now in production.
Mulligan has published his autobiography (co-written by Vancouverite Glen Schaefer) called Mulligan's Stew. The book covers his life from growing up in North Vancouver to the present day.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Terry David Mulligan at IMDb
Tasting Room Radio Homepage
Hollywood & Vines
CKUA Radio
Terry David Mulligan discography at Discogs