Yury Vasilyevich Yakovlev (Russian: Ю́рий Васи́льевич Я́ковлев; 25 April 1928 – 30 November 2013) was a Soviet and Russian actor. People's Artist of the USSR (1976).


== Main works ==
Yury Yakovlev is best known for his roles in late Soviet film, particularly for his roles in Eldar Ryazanov's and Leonid Gaidai's comedies. Yakovlev's most popular comedic roles in Eldar Ryazanov's films are Poruchik Rzhevsky in Hussar Ballad (1962), Ippolit in The Irony of Fate (1976), and comic roles of the tsar Ivan the Terrible and his namesake Ivan Vasilevich Bunsha in Leonid Gaidai's comedy Ivan Vasilievich: Back to the Future (1973). He also played dramatic roles, such as inimitable complicated psychological role of the Prince Myshkin in The Idiot (1958), and other cinema roles (Dangerous turn, Earthly Love movies). He was the leading artist of the Vakhtangov Theater during its heyday.


== Life and career ==


=== The early years ===
From a young age he was fond of acting and theatre. At the turn of the 1940s, he studied acting at Shchukin Theatrical School of Vakhtangov Theatre in Moscow starting to work as an actor at Vakhtangov Theatre.


=== Theatrical career ===
Yakovlev joined the ensemble of the Vakhtangov Theatre in 1952. He played over seventy roles onstage, including Casanova in Three Ages of Casanova, Duke Bolingbroke in Glass of Water, and Prokofiev in Lessons of Master.


=== Film career ===
Yakovlev became really famous as a cinema actor in 1958, after his inimitable complicated psychological role of the Prince Myshkin in The Idiot (1958 film) (the film adaptation of Dostoyevsky’s novel) directed by Ivan Pyryev. He achieved international fame playing the role as Prince Myshkin. Yakovlev made his first appearance in an Eldar Ryazanov comedy in 1961, in The Man From Nowhere. 
Yakovlev followed his first success with regular appearances in Eldar Ryazanov's comedies, most notably splendid film Hussar Ballad in 1962, in which he played phantasmagoric role of Poruchik Rzhevsky. The feature was such a resounding success that Rzhevsky's character gave rise to innumerable Russian jokes.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Yakovlev branched out into further various roles, from the nobleman Stiva Oblonsky in the 1967 adaptation, the classic Soviet movie adaptation of Tolstoy's Anna Karenina, directed by Alexander Zarkhi, to curiously jealous fiancé Ippolit in Ryazanov's The Irony of Fate, 1975. Perhaps his most famous roles were the tsar Ivan the Terrible and his namesake Ivan Vasilevich Bunsha in Leonid Gaidai's 1973 comedy Ivan Vasilievich: Back to the Future - the movie about the travel using the time machine (based on the play Ivan Vasilievich (play) by Mikhail Bulgakov).


=== Decline in popularity ===
His participation in two-part film "Love Earth" and "Destiny" - a series of movies about the World War II brought him the USSR State Prize for 1979.
His film career effectively came to a halt after the role of the alien Bi in Georgiy Daneliya’s 1986 sci-fi comedy Kin-dza-dza! where he starred alongside Yevgeny Leonov and Stanislav Lyubshin. The last role in Ikno was the role in the film The Irony of Fate 2 (Ирония судьбы. Продолжение) as Ippolit Georgievich.


== Death ==
Yakovlev felt ill in early morning of 29 November 2013. He soon fainted in his home. He was rushed to a Moscow hospital where he died there on 30 November 2013 from heart failure, aged 85. On the same day, the death of Yuri Yakovlev was reported by RIA Novosti to Times.am 'with reference to the theater's press service. 

Yury Vasilyevich Yakovlev, one of the most popular and critically acclaimed Soviet film actors, died today in Moscow hospital. Ria Novosti informs about this referring to the Vakhtangov's theatre press service.
RIA News posted that day the information:

Юрий Васильевич скончался сегодня ночью в больнице. Прощание состоится в театре Вахтангова. Дата будет определена позже.
Yuri Vasilyevich died in the hospital tonight. His funeral will be held at the Vakhtangov Theater. The date will be announced later

Прощание с Юрием Васильевичем Яковлевым состоится на основной сцене Вахтанговского театре во вторник в 10.00, а похоронен артист будет на Новодевичьем кладбище.
Farewell to Yuri Vasilyevich Yakovlev will take place on the main stage of the Vakhtangov Theater on Tuesday at 10.00, and the artist will be buried at the Novodevichy Cemetery.


== Bibliography ==
In 1997, the publishing house Art (Iskusstvo) published a book by Yakovlev entitled Album of my destiny (Russian: Альбом судьбы моей, romanized: Al'bom sud'by moyey)


== The actor's attitude to the his roles ==
Yakovlev himself had a different attitude to the roles he played and did not always coincide with the audience's sympathy.  
The actor described the most famous roles in the following Quotations from the interview.  
Yakovlev considered the role of Steva Oblonsky in Anna Karenina as underestimated. 
"The Hussar Ballad" is still going on, and many love it. And Lieutenant Rzhevsky became, as it were, a real person - there are jokes about him, like about Chapaev, and recently in Rzhev they even decided to erect a monument to him." 
The artist spoke in more detail about the inimitable Tsar Ivan Vasilievich and his double, the house manager: “At first it was quite difficult. It was impossible to play the Tsar seriously, because it was a comedy. And yet in these unusual circumstances he had to remain Ivan the Terrible. And Bunsh had to be portrayed. It had to be a very everyday idiot with two convolutions. And I found an approach to him. Firstly, he speaks quickly. Such people have one thought running ahead, and they try to express it sooner before it leaves. what if he also lisps? This is ridiculous. I tried it. It worked. " 
The actor called his role in "Kin-dza-dza" completely unusual: "Besides, the script was being rewritten all the time. We came from the shooting, Danelia and Gabriadze locked ourselves in the room and rewrote the text overnight. And sometimes it turned out to be completely opposite to what we are. have already learned ... We most often communicated with colleagues using the word "Ku". Briefly and succinctly. " 
But about the first big role in the cinema - Prince Myshkin, Yakovlev spoke very rarely and laconically: "This is different."


== Selected filmography ==


== Honors and awards ==
Honorary Member of the Russian Academy of Arts
Honored Artist of the RSFSR (1961)
People's Artist of the RSFSR (1968)
People's Artist of the USSR (1976)
Order "For Merit to the Fatherland":
2nd class (10 June 2008) - for outstanding contributions to the development of domestic theatrical and cinematic arts, many years of creative activity
3rd class (17 October 1996) - for services to the State and outstanding contribution to the development of theatrical arts
Order of Lenin (1988)
Order of the Red Banner of Labour (1978)
USSR State Prize (1979) - for his role Tikhon Ivanovich Bryukhanova in two-part film "Love Earth" and "Destiny"
Stanislavsky State Prize of the RSFSR (1970) - for his performance as Yegor Dmitrievich Glumova in the play "The Wise Man Stumbles" by Alexander Ostrovsky
State Prize of the Russian Federation in Literature and Art in 1994 (29 May 1995) - for the performance of the State Academic Theatre named Eugene. Vakhtangov "Guilty Without Guilt" on the play by Alexander Ostrovsky
Russian Federation President Prize in Literature and Art in 2003 (13 February 2004) - for outstanding creative and scientific contribution to the artistic culture of Russia
"Golden Mask", awarded with "Silver Mask" for best actor (Salvador Allende, "Unfinished Dialogue") (1976)
Gold Medal for AP Dovzhenko film "Destiny" (1978)
Prize "Crystal Turandot" (1998)
Prize of the business community, "Idol" for high service to art (1999)
Chekhov Medal (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==
Yury Yakovlev at IMDb
Yury Yakovlev at Find a Grave
Yakovlev on the Vakhtangov Theatre Homepage
Biography of Yury Yakovlev (in English)
Yuriy Yakovlev – Timeline featuring movies and other highlights from his career and personal life