John Dehner (born John Dehner Forkum; November 23, 1915 – February 4, 1992) was an American actor and animator. He had a long and prolific career performing on stage, radio, television, and film, often being cast as droll villains or shady authority figures. Between 1940 and 1989, he appeared in over 260 films, television series, and made-for-television movies.


== Early years ==
Dehner was born in Staten Island, New York City.
He initially went into art after studying at the Grand Central School of Art in New York City. He worked as an animator at Walt Disney Studios in Burbank.


== Radio ==
Dehner's early radio jobs included being a news editor and a disc jockey. While working at KFWB in Los Angeles, California, he was a member of a news team that won a Peabody Award for its reporting on the first United Nations conference.Possessing a deep, resonant voice, Dehner had an extensive career as a radio actor and was once recognized by Radio Life Magazine as having the entertainment industry's "best radio voice". He performed as a lead or supporting player in such series as The Whistler, Gunsmoke, Laramie, and Philip Marlowe. He also starred as Paladin in the radio version of Have Gun – Will Travel,: 146  one of the few times a show began on television and then was later adapted for radio. On CBS Radio in 1958, he starred in the series Frontier Gentleman, a Western that opened with a trumpet theme by Jerry Goldsmith and the following introduction:

Herewith, an Englishman's account of life and death in the West. As a reporter for The London Times, he writes his colorful and unusual accounts. But as a man with a gun, he lives and becomes a part of the violent years in the new territories. Now, starring John Dehner, this is the story of J. B. Kendall, Frontier Gentleman. ...
Written and directed by Antony Ellis, the short-lived series followed the adventures of journalist Kendall as he roamed the West in the post-Civil War United States searching for dramatic stories for his newspaper.
Dehner portrayed Elmer Truitt on The Trouble with the Truitts: 339–340  and the title character on The Judge.: 181  He also performed regularly on Family Skeleton,: 114  Escape,: 110  and The Black Book.: 43 


== Films ==
Over a 45-year movie career in Hollywood, between 1940 and 1986, Dehner appeared in no fewer than 126 feature films and shorts. He played Sheriff Pat Garrett in Gore Vidal's The Left Handed Gun opposite Paul Newman as Billy the Kid.
He appeared too in Scaramouche (1952) as Doutreval of Dijon; and he played a district attorney in Please Murder Me, an American film noir film released in 1956, a production directed by Peter Godfrey and starring Angela Lansbury and Raymond Burr. The following year, he performed a non-singing role of Mr. Bascombe, the mill owner and intended robbery victim, in the film version of Rodgers and Hammerstein's Carousel. In 1951, he appeared in the film The Texas Rangers. He also played the villain in The Man from Bitter Ridge (1955), as well as Taylor Swope, one of Vinnie Harrold's (Broderick Crawford) bad guy gang in The Fastest Gun Alive (1957), starring Glenn Ford. In 1978's The Boys From Brazil, he portrayed Henry Wheelock, the last man killed by Dr. Josef Mengele.


== Television ==

Dehner's roles on TV programs included Marshal Edge Troy on Young Maverick,: 1207  Jim Duke Williams on The Roaring 20's,: 899  Dr. Charles Claver on Temperatures Rising,: 758  T. Jacob Broggi on Enos,: 308–309  Cyril Bennett on The Doris Day Show,: 278–279  Billy Erskine on The Colbys,: 198–199 , Soapie Smith on The Alaskans and Colonel Harvey on the Andy Griffith Show. He also performed regularly on The Don Knotts Show: 275  and The Betty White Show (1958).: 94 In the summer of 1955, Dehner was cast as Lieutenant Zetterquest in The Soldiers.: 990  He also acted in the episode "Crack-Up" of Gunsmoke. In that 1957 episode he portrays Nate Springer, an unpredictable, psychopathic gunman who coldly kills a small dog on the main street of Dodge City before he faces Marshall Dillon in a formulaic TV showdown.Dehner played an extremely broad range of starkly different characters in the 1957–1962 series Maverick opposite James Garner and Jack Kelly, including his pivotal role as the banker Bates in the famous episode "Shady Deal at Sunny Acres" as well as a deftly comedic performance in "Greenbacks, Unlimited" with Garner and Gage Clarke.
In the 1958 episode "Twelve Guns" on NBC's Western Cimarron City, Dehner portrays a prosperous area rancher whose outlaw son, played by Nick Adams, joins a gang that demands $50,000 from the citizens of Cimarron City.In 1959 he played Cleve Colter, a rebellious member of a group trudging thru a winter storm en route to California in "The Annie Griffith Story" on Wagon Train.
In 1960, Dehner was cast as Major Randolph in the episode "Friend of the Family" on the CBS western The Texan, starring Rory Calhoun.Dehner guest-starred twice in the western TV series Bonanza: he played Captain Pender in the 1960 episode "The Mission" and he portrayed Jean Lafitte in the 1964 episode "The Gentleman from New Orleans".Late in 1962, Dehner guest-starred as Dan Tabor in the episode "Echo of a Man" of the NBC western with a modern setting Empire, starring Richard Egan as rancher Jim Redigo. In 1961 and ‘64, Dehner starred in The Twilight Zone episodes "The Jungle" and "Mr. Garrity and the Graves".Of all the television series on which Dehner performed over the years, his 12 appearances on the long-running series Gunsmoke perhaps showcased best the full range of his acting talents. Between 1955 and 1968, he portrayed a diverse cast of characters, such as a psychotic gunman in the episode "Crack Up"; a pathetic town drunk in "The Bottle”; another town drunk - yet a protective torn father in “The Bottleman”; a distraught, lonely widower who marries an Indian and must deal with the anger of his only son from that decision in "The Squaw"; a dejected and childless farmer in "Caleb"; a brain-damaged freight operator who undergoes a drastic personality change in "Ash"; bar owner Kitty Russell’s long, lost father in “Daddy-O”; and a timid resident of Dodge City who gains fleeting celebrity after killing an outlaw in the episode "The Pariah".In 1966, as Morgan Starr, episode "One Spring Like Long Ago" that included Warren Oates, and as Marshall Eliazer Teague, both in the 90 minute TV western series The Virginian in the 1969 episode titled "Halfway Back from Hell".


== Personal life and death ==
Dehner was married twice, the first time in 1941 to Roma Leonore Meyers, with whom he had two children. Three years after the couple's divorce in 1970, he wed Evelyn Severance. They remained together for 19 years, until his death.
In 1992, at the age of 76, Dehner died from complications of emphysema and diabetes in Santa Barbara, California. He was cremated and his ashes interred at Carpinteria Cemetery in Carpinteria, California.


== Selected filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
John Dehner at IMDb
John Dehner at Find a Grave