Oscar McLollie - stage name. (Born Oscar Joseph Lollie, September 22, 1924 – July 4, 2008) was an American jump blues singer.


== Biography ==
He was born in Kelly, Louisiana. He was drafted into service in World War II, and sang baritone with a vocal group, the Bullets, at USO shows.  After the war he moved to Los Angeles, and sang in local jump blues bands before being recruited by Mercury Records, for a short time, as their West Coast A&R man for black music. He also recorded the song "I'm Hurt" for Mercury.When McLollie's contract with Mercury ended, he returned to performing, and in 1953 was asked by Leon René and his son Rafael "Googie" René to record their song "The Honey Jump" for their new record label, Class.  The upbeat song, with honking saxes and pounding piano, became a regional hit and was leased to Modern Records, but was covered more successfully by other artists.  His follow-up, "All That Oil in Texas", was also successful locally.  Oscar McLollie and his Honey Jumpers continued over the next few years to record a series of songs written by Leon or Googie René, including "God Gave Us Christmas", and "Lolly Pop" which was covered by Louis Jordan.McLollie and his band remained popular live performers.  In 1955, he recorded the ballad "Convicted", with an upbeat B-side, "Roll Hot Rod, Roll".  The single, promoted by DJ Alan Freed, became McLollie's biggest seller on the Modern label and won him a slot on the Hunter Hancock TV show.  However, later releases were less successful.  After returning to the Class label, he achieved his only national chart success in 1958 when "Hey Girl – Hey Boy", a duet with Jeanette Baker backed by Googie René's band, reached number 61 on the Billboard pop chart.  The song was also covered by Louis Prima and Keely Smith. However, it was not successfully followed up.
Later, McLollie continued to perform in cabaret in Los Angeles.  Reportedly, he also spent some time in the Philippines, where he appeared in low-budget martial arts movies.In the 60s, Oscar Lollie met Anna Margaret McCabe in Los Angeles California where she was residing after leaving B.C. Canada where she was raised; though born in Ontario, Canada. Oscar and Anna married in Los Angeles, California, and had two daughters. Cassandra Cecelia Lollie (Cassy) born in 1962, and Teresa Michele Lollie (Tracy) born in 1964. Still based in Los Angeles, California, in 1969 the family immigrated to raise their two daughters in Anna's hometown of Chilliwack B.C., Canada. During this time, Oscar remained active as a singer in the entertainment business. Though based in Canada, he was on the road US side, and overseas for great lengths of time.
Oscar and Anna divorced in the 70's, and Oscar Lollie returned to California.
He died in Oakland, California, in 2008.


== References ==