Hariprasad Chaurasia (born 1 July 1938) is an Indian music director and classical flautist, who plays the flute, in the Hindustani classical tradition.


== Early life ==
Chaurasia was born in Allahabad(1938) (officially called Prayagraj) in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. His mother died when he was 6. He had to learn music without his father's knowledge, as his father wanted him to become a wrestler. He did go to the Akhada and trained with his father for some time, although he also started learning music and practising at his friend's house.
He has stated, I was not any good at wrestling. I went there only to please my father. But maybe because of the strength and stamina I built up then, I'm able to play the bansuri even to this day.


== Career ==

Chaurasia started learning vocal music from his neighbour, Rajaram, at the age of 15. Later, he switched to playing the flute under the tutelage of Bholanath Prasanna of Varanasi for eight years. He joined the All India Radio, Cuttack, Odisha in 1957 and worked as a composer and performer.  Much later, while working for All India Radio, he received guidance from the reclusive Annapurna Devi, daughter of Baba Allaudin Khan. She only agreed to teach him if he was willing to unlearn all that he had learnt until then. Another version is that she only agreed to teach him after he took the decision to switch from right-handed to left-handed playing to show her his commitment. In any case Chaurasia plays left-handed to this day.
Apart from classical music, Hariprasad has collaborated with Shivkumar Sharma, forming a group called Shiv-Hari. The pair composed music for many popular movies, including Silsila and Chandni, and created some highly popular songs. Pandit Chaurasia also collaborated with Bhubaneswar Mishra, forming the pair "Bhuban-Hari" (in line with Shiv-Hari), and the pair composed music for many Odia movies, creating numerous songs that were hugely popular in the state. These include Muje janena kaha baata (sung by Suman Kalyanpur; movie: Gapa helebi Sata); and all songs from Maa o Mamata, and many more.
Pandit Chaurasia's nephew and pupil Rakesh Chaurasia is a highly accomplished flautist now, and has been performing globally with such eminent maestros as Ustad Zakir Hussain.
He serves as the artistic director of the World Music Department at the Rotterdam Music Conservatory in the Netherlands. He was also the founder of the Vrindavan Gurukul in Mumbai (opened 2006) and Vrindavan Gurukul in Bhubaneshwar (opened 2010). Both of these institutes are schools dedicated to training students in bansuri in the Guru-shishya tradition.He has collaborated with several western musicians, including John McLaughlin, Jan Garbarek, and Ken Lauber, and has composed music for Indian films. Chaurasia also played on The Beatles' 1968 B-side "The Inner Light", which was written by George Harrison.  He also played with George Harrison on the Beatle’s first solo release, Wonderwall, and with Harrison, Ravi Shankar and others on the Dark Horse Records release Shankar Family & Friends.


== Personal life ==
Chaurasia was married to Kamala Devi and Anuradha Roy. He has three sons Vinay, Ajay and Rajeev, five granddaughters and a single grandson. His nephew Rakesh Chaurasia is also a flautist.


== In popular culture ==
The 2013 documentary film Bansuri Guru features the life and legacy of Chaurasia and was directed by the musician's son Rajeev Chaurasia and produced by the Films Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.


== Awards ==
Sangeet Natak Academy - 1984
Konark Samman - 1992
Padma Bhushan - 1992
Yash Bharati Samman - 1994
Padma Vibhushan - 2000
Pandit Chatur Lal Excellence Award - 2015
Hafiz Ali Khan Award - 2000
Dinanath Mangeshkar Award - 2000
Pune Pandit Award - 2008, by The Art & Music Foundation, Pune, India
Akshaya Samman - 2009
Honorary Doctorate, North Orissa University - 2008
Honorary Doctorate, Utkal University - 2011
National Eminence award, NADA VIDYA BHARTI by Visakha Music and Dance Academy, Vizag - 2009
The 25 Greatest Global Living Legends In India by NDTV - 2013


== Books ==
Official Biography 'Breath of Gold' by Sathya Saran- 2019
'Hariprasad Chaurasia: Romance of the Bamboo Reed', by Uma Vasudev - 2005
Official biography "Woodwinds of Change" by Surjit Singh - 2008
'Hariprasad Chaurasia and the Art of Improvisation', by Henri Tournier
'Bansuri Samrat : Hariprasad Chaurasia', by Surjit Singh


== Discography ==
These are major albums released by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia

1967Call of the Valley with Shivkumar Sharma and Brij Bhushan Kabra1978Krishnadhwani 601981Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia - Flute1984Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia - Flute (different set of ragas, same album name)1987Morning to Midnight Ragas - Morning Ragas1988Call of the Valley1989Venu
Live in Ahmedabad '891990Immortal Series1991Megh Malhar1992Night Ragas
Live in Amsterdam '92
Morning to Midnight Ragas - Afternoon Ragas
All time Favourites
Live from Sawai Gandharva Music Festival - Video (VHS)
Raga-s DU Nord Et Du Sud
Immortal Series - Flute Fantasia1993Indian Classical Masters
Daylight Ragas
Flute - Hariprasad Chaurasia
Soundscapes - Music of the Rivers - Hari Prasad Chaurasia1994Thumri - The Music of Love
In A Mellow Mood
Possession
Immortal Series - Devine Drupad
Classic Greats1 - Ideas on Flute1995In Live Concert
Cascades of Hindustani Music
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 4am to 7am Raga Bhairava: Integration
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 7am to 10am Raga Gurjari Todi: Compassion
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 10am to 1pm Raga Vrindavani Saranga: Greater Energy
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 1pm to 4pm Raga Multani: Affuence
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 4pm to 7pm Raga Marwa: Coherence
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 7pm to 10pm Raga Desh: Joy
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 10pm to 1am Raga Abhogi: Peaceful Slumber
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 1am to 4am Raga Sindhu Bhairavi: Gentleness
Hariprasad Chaurasia - Flute
Malhar-Chandrika
Music 157 - Live in London
Music - Flute
Great Jugalbandis
Music from the world of OSHO - Above & Beyond
Prem Yog
Written on the Wind
Romantic Themes
Saptarishi - Live at Siri Fort
The Mystical Flute of Hari Prasad Chaurasia
Maestro's Choice
Basant Bahar
Chaurasia's Choice1996Hari Prasad Chaurasia & his Divine Flute
Flute Recital
Valley Recalls - In search of Peace, Love and Harmony
Krishna's Flute - Master of the Bansuri
Classical Encounters - A live Experience with Pt. Hari Prasad Chaurasia
Fabulous Flute
Pundit Hari Prasad Chaurasia
In Concert - Vancouver, B.C
Hariprasad Chaurasia - Flute
The Bamboo Flautist of His Generation
Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia - Nada in Jerusalem1997Classical Encounters - A Live Experience with Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia
Great Jugalbandis
The Golden Collection (Classical)
Immortal Essence
Golden Raga Collection
Bustan Abraham - Fanar (Guest appearance alongside Zakir Hussain)1998Samarpan-VCD Special 60th Birthday Edition
The Charms Companion
Morning to Midnight - Morning to Dusk
Music for Reiki1999Jugalbandi
Rasdhaara
Live Inside Khajuraho
Live in New Delhi - '89
Golden Raga Collection
Musical Titans of India - Jugalbandhi Video (VHS)
Pure Joy - Positive Energy Music2000Music without Boundaries
Maaya - Far East
Hriday - Cuba
Caravan Spain
Live Concert at Savai Gandharva Music Festival
Gurukul - The Guru shishya Parampara2001Adi-Ananth
Love Divine - Parables of Passion
Power & Grace - Live at the Saptak Festival 2001
Discovery of Indian Classical Music
Flute Duet2003Flute Deity Hariprasad Chaurasia
The Greatest Hits of Hariprasad Chaurasia
Salvation - Instrumental Bhajans
Sounds of Silence2015Ajanma - Hariprasad Chaurasia (Solo album)

Year unknownLa Flute De Pundit Hariprasad Chaurasia
Hariprasad Chaurasia - The Most Celebrated Flautist of India
Charm of the Bamboo flute
Kalpana - Imagination
A Kaleidoscope of various ragas
Krishna Utsav
Kali - Classical Instrumental
Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia - the Living Legend of Flute
Moon Light Moods - Flute Recital
Pt. Hariprasad Chaurasia - The Living Legend of Flute
Indian Music
HariDhwani
Dancing Water
Fusion India - Passage of India Series
Being Still
Dhammapada - Sacred teaching of Buddha
The Charms Companion
Eternity
Nothing but wind (1988) - Composed by IlaiyaraajaWith Zakir HussainMaking Music (ECM, 1986)
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 4am to 7am Raga Bhairava
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 7am to 10am Raga Jaita
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 10am to 1pm Raga Ahir Lalita
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 1pm to 4pm Raga Samanta Saranga
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 4pm to 7pm Raga Puriya Dhanashri
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 7pm to 10pm Raga Maru Bihaga
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 10pm to 1am Raga Gunji Kanada
Maharishi Gandharva Veda - Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia - 1am to 4am Raga Shuddha VasantaContributing artistThe Rough Guide to the Music of India and Pakistan (World Music Network, 1996)


== Music for Bollywood films ==
Along with Shivkumar Sharma he composed music for

Chandni
Darr
Lamhe
Silsila (1981 film)
Faasle
Vijay
Sahibaan


== Music for Telugu films ==
The music for the film Sirivennela was composed by K. V. Mahadevan which revolves around the role of Pandit Hari Prasad, a blind flautist played by Sarvadaman Banerjee and flute renditions by Chaurasia.


== Music for English films ==
Some of his music is used in Mithaq Kazimi's 16 Days in Afghanistan.


== References ==


== External links ==
HariJi.org
Official website
Interview with Choodie Shivaram
Hariprasad Chaurasia by Mohan Nadkarni