Allan Francis Smethurst (19 November 1927 – 22 December 2000), aka The Singing Postman was an English folk singer and postman. He is best known for his self-penned novelty song, "Hev Yew Gotta Loight, Boy?", which earned him an Ivor Novello Award in 1966, “Come Along A Me” and "A Miss from Diss". The Guardian dubbed him a "bookishly melancholy folk-satirist".


== Life and career ==
Born in Walshaw, near Bury, Lancashire, England, the son of Allan and Gladys Mabel (née Curson), Smethurst was raised in Sheringham, Norfolk from the age of 11. His mother came from the nearby village of Stiffkey. It is often thought that he became a postman in Lavenham, Suffolk, but photos of him in the area are just promotional material. Smethurst joined the Post Office in 1953, and later worked in Grimsby. He never worked for the GPO in Norfolk or Suffolk.Smethurst hummed tunes on his daily post round for twelve years, writing and singing songs in his native Norfolk dialect. An audition tape sent to the BBC earned him a spot on Ralph Tuck's BBC East regional radio programme Wednesday Morning. His popularity led to Tuck recording Smethurst on his own record label, ‘The Smallest Recording Organisation in the World’, based in Lowestoft. A four track EP containing his signature tune “Hev Yew Gotta Loight Boy”, made the EP charts in 1965. This was followed by another EP release by Ralph Tuck, and an album The Singing Postman's Year. He was then signed to EMI who re-released earlier songs and recorded new items. A colour promotional film was made of “Hev Yew Gotta Loight Boy” which has survived to this day. He made numerous live and promotional performances, including on Top of the Pops, but was afflicted by nerves and stage fright. His live performances included a summer season in 1965 at the Windmill Theatre in Great Yarmouth.In 1966, the Singing Postman's best known hit "Hev Yew Gotta Loight, Boy?" won Smethurst the Ivor Novello Award for best novelty song of the year. Rolf Harris recorded a cover version without success. The song had a small comeback in 1994, when it was featured on a television commercial for Ovaltine. It was also covered by punk band, Splodgenessabounds, in 1981.
Smethurst left the music industry in 1970 citing stage fright and arthritic hands. He later admitted to an alcohol problem and revealed all his earnings were gone and he was penniless. He  spent his last twenty years living quietly in a Salvation Army hostel in Grimsby, where he died from a heart attack in December 2000.In September 2010, a BBC Radio 4 programme, "In Search of the Singing Postman", was broadcast which was written and presented by D. J. Taylor.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
The Singing Postman's Year (RTP)
Recorded Delivery (Parlophone, 1966)
The Sound Barrier (Parlophone, 1967)
The Best of the Singing Postman (Starline, 1967)
First Class Male (1971, Gemini)
Hev Yew Gotta Loight, Boy? (Parlophone, 2005)


=== Singles and EPs ===
"First Delivery EP" (EMI, 1966)
"Second Delivery EP" (Parlophone, 1966)
"Third Delivery EP" (Parlophone, 1966)
"Fourth Delivery EP" (Parlophone, 1966)
"Ladies Darts Team" / "Roundabout" (Parlophone, 1966)
"Mind How You Go" (Parlophone, 1967)
"Please Mr. Postman" (Parlophone, 1967)
"Fertilising Lisa" / "Ballad of A Ten Bob Note" (President PVK.005, 1977)
"Hey the Bottom Dropped Owt" (Ralph Tuck, 1997)


== References ==


== External links ==
"Hev Yew Gotta Loight, Boy?" lyrics
Singing Postman biographical information
Singing Postman article