Omkar Prasad Nayyar (16 January 1926 – 28 January 2007) was an Indian film music composer, singer-songwriter, music producer, and musician. He is considered to be one of the most rhythmic and melodious music directors of the Hindi film industry. He won the 1958 Filmfare Award for Best Music Director for Naya Daur. Nayyar worked extensively with singers Geeta Dutt, Asha Bhosle and Mohammed Rafi, though not with leading Bollywood female singer Lata Mangeshkar.
Nayyar had recognised Kishore Kumar long before he became a popular singer. The film Baap Re Baap is full of Kishore hits in the inimitable O.P. style as well as in the Ashok Kumar, Kishore Kumar, Padmini starrer Raagini (1958), but the relationship did not endure.


== Early life and career ==
Nayyar was born in Lahore, British India (present Pakistan). He then underwent music training.
He composed the background score for Kaneez (1949), and 1952's Aasmaan (produced by Dalsukh M. Pancholi), was his first film as music director. Nayyar then composed music for Chham Chhama Chham (1952) and Baaz (1953). Film producer, director and actor Guru Dutt enlisted him to compose and conduct music for Aar Paar (1954), Mr. & Mrs. '55 (1955) and C.I.D. (1956). Nayyar's early work was primarily performed by Shamshad Begum, Geeta Dutt and Mohammed Rafi, with Asha Bhosle introduced in C.I.D. Nayyar never worked with Lata Mangeshkar, though her song Saari Saari Raat Teri Yaad Satayein from the 1958 film Aji Bas Shukriyawas used in the 1973 Hindi film Taxi Driver, for which he was the music director.
In 1957 Filmalaya introduced Nasir Hussain, who wanted a composer to provide romantic scores for newcomers Shammi Kapoor and Ameeta. Nayyar's scores were featured in the Hussain films Tumsa Nahin Dekha (1957) and Phir Wohi Dil Laya Hoon (1964). During the decade, state-controlled All India Radio banned most of Nayyar's songs because the broadcaster considered them too "trendy".According to music and film expert Rajesh Subramanian, "Aap Ke Haseen Rukh" (from Baharen Phir Bhi Aayengi) was planned with full orchestration but many of the musicians were late for the recording. After a disagreement with Mohammed Rafi, Nayyar began working with singer Mahendra Kapoor. Kapoor performed Nayyar's song "Badal Jaaye Agar Maali, Chaman Hotaa Nahi Khaali" in Bahaaren Phir Bhi Aayengi. Based on a Bengali language work by Rabindranath Tagore, Nayyar composed "Chal Akelaa, Chal Akelaa" (sung by Mukesh in 1969 film Sambandh).
Nayyar co-produced songs with Shamshad Begum (including "Kajra Mohabbatwala"), and after Madhubala's 1969 death Vyjayanthimala, Sadhana, Mala Sinha, Padmini, Asha Parekh and Sharmila Tagore lip-synced several Nayyar-Bhosle songs. Nayyar and Bhosle parted ways in 1974, and he then worked with Dilraj Kaur, Krishna Kalle, Vani Jayaram and Kavita Krishanmurthy. Majrooh Sultanpuri and Sahir Ludhianvi wrote the lyrics for some of Nayyar's earlier songs, including "Naya Daur". Nayyar also worked with developing lyricists such as Jan Nisar Akhtar, Qamar Jalalabadi, S. H. Bihari and Ahmed Wasi. He began the tradition of assigning full, three-minute songs to comedians. Om Prakash sang Nayyar's "Churi Bane Kanta Bane" in Jaali Note and Eent ki dukhi paan ka ikka in Howrah Bridge and Johnny Walker sang "Aye Dil Hai Mushkil Jeena Yahaan" in CID, "Jaane Kahan Mera Jigar Gaya Jee" in Mr. & Mrs. 55, "Main Bambaika Baaboo, Naam Meraa Anjaanaa" in Naya Daur and "Bajewala" in Basant.
In addition to songs for Asha Bhosle and Geeta Dutt's, Thandi Thandi Hawaa, Nayyar wrote "Yeh Desh Hai Veer Jawaanonkaa" (featuring Dilip Kumar and Ajit) for Naya Daur (1957). The song earned him the 1958 Filmfare Best Music Director Award. The last Nayyar song performed by Bhosle was "Chain Se Humko Kabhi". Intended for Pran Jaye Par Vachan Na Jaye (1973), disappeared in the film's final cut but won Bhosle the 1975 Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer. Nayyar was less active in the 1970s and did not compose music for younger actors such as Rajesh Khanna and Amitabh Bachchan. His films included Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor, Dev Anand, Guru Dutt, Dharmendra, Shammi Kapoor, Joy Mukherjee, Biswajit, Feroz Khan, Bharat Bhushan, Madhubala, Asha Parekh, Sadhana, Mumtaz, Sharmila Tagore, Rajshree, Rekha, Ameeta and Shyama. In addition to Hindi films, Nayyar composed for Neerajanam in Telugu. He made a brief comeback during the 1990s with Mangni and Nishchay in 1992 and Zid in 1994.
O.P. Nayyar played a major part in shaping up Asha's career, but Asha rarely mentions it. She mentions S. D. Burman's name instead. Why OP and Asha parted away in 1974, both of them never talked about it.


== Personal life ==
In retirement Nayyar stayed in touch with only a few people, including Gajendra Singh and Ahmed Wasi; Singh included him as a judge for his television show, Sa Re Ga Ma Pa. Wasi interviewed Nayyar twice on Vividh Bharati and presented a series of six one-hour episodes, Mujhe Yaad Sab Hai Zaraa Zaraa, about his life.
He had two brothers: P. P. (a physician) and G. P. (a retired army dentist in Secunderabad, who died in 2010). Nayyar's wife, Saroj Mohini Nayyar, wrote the lyrics to "Preetam Aan Milo" (originally sung by C. H. Atma in 1945 which was used later in the film Mr. & Mrs. '55 by Geeta Dutt). Estranged from his family, he requested that they be barred from his funeral. Nayyar had moved out of his Mumbai home, staying with a friend in Virar and then with a friend in Thane. He died on 28 January 2007, survived by his wife, three daughters and a son. Nayyar's death was followed by tributes from many Bollywood figures, including Lata Mangeshkar, Sharmila Tagore, Mumtaz, Mahesh Bhatt, Khayyam, Shakti Samanta, Sonu Nigam, Ravindra Jain, Anu Malik, B. R. Chopra and Shammi Kapoor. A commemorative stamp was issued by India Post on 3 May 2013. His granddaughter Niharica Raizada is also an actress.


== Filmography ==


== Albums ==
The Best Of O. P. Nayyar Vol. 1 to Vol. 6
Parichay – Introduction To India's Musical Geniuses (O. P. Nayyar)|Parichay – Introduction To India's Musical Geniuses
OP Nayyar-Penaz Masani – Dekho Mohabbat Ka Dastoor
OP Nayyar-Penaz Masani – Jaane Do (1990)
OP Nayyar-Ashok Khosla – Naye Kapde Badlkar
OP Nayyar-Ashok Khosla – Ajnabi Shehar Mein
OP Nayyar-Runa Laila – Allah Ne Is Dil Ne
OP Nayyar-Runa Laila – Kehdo Is Raat Se
OP Nayyar-Runa Laila – Wadiyan Wadiyan
Golden Collection – O. P. Nayyar (compilation)
O. P. Nayyar, Asha Bhosle – Sunheri Yaadein


== References ==


== External links ==
O. P. Nayyar at IMDb
List of Hindi songs composed by Nayyar