T. V. Sankaranarayanan (Tiruvalangadu Vembu Iyer Sankaranarayanan, born 7 March 1945) is a Carnatic vocalist (South Indian classical singer), known for his music that stems from the style of his guru and maternal-uncle, Madurai Mani Iyer. TVS was awarded the Madras Music Academy's Sangeetha Kalanidhi in 2003. 
Sankaranarayanan is particularly noted for easily reaching the upper notes.
Some of his musical disciples include R. Suryaprakash, his daughter Amruta Sankaranarayanan and his son Mahadevan Sankaranarayanan. 


== Profile ==

He was born in Mayiladuturai of Thanjavur district in the state of Tamil Nadu in south India. His father, Vembu Iyer, was a disciple of Madurai Mani Iyer; and his mother was Mani Iyer's sister. At the age of nine, he started learning music from his uncle (maamaa), Madurai Mani Iyer. And he also learned from his father Vembu Iyer. He made his debut on the concert platform in 1968 and then gradually established himself as a Carnatic vocalist.  He has performed in India and abroad and has several albums. In a profile published in the Financial Express, Subbudu, a music critic, once wrote: "Sankaranarayanan is indeed an asset to the Carnatic music world, where the tribe of good vocalists is dwindling."


== Awards and honours ==
Gayaka Sikhamani by Bhairavi, USA in 1981
Swara Laya Ratnakara by Ramakrishnananda Saraswati of Sri Vidyasram, Rishikesh in 1986
Ganakalaratnam by Dr. Semmangudi Srinivasa Ayyar in 1987
Nadakanal By Nadakanal, Madras in 1987
Innisai Perarasu By Bharati Kalamandram, Toronto in 1981
Sangeetha Ratnakara By Vassar College in 1975
Swara Yoga Shironmani By Yoga Jivana Satsangha (International)in 1997
Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1990
Padma Bhushan by the Government of India in 2003
Sangeetha Kalanidhi by the Madras Music Academy in 2003
Sangeetha Kalasikhamani by The Indian Fine Arts Society in 2005
Vidhya Tapasvi by TAPAS Cultural Foundation in 2012


== References ==

On a joyous musical journey from The Hindu newspaper