Carlos Peña Romulo  (14 January 1898 – 15 December 1985) was a Filipino diplomat, statesman, soldier, journalist and author. He was a reporter at 16, a newspaper editor by the age of 20, and a publisher at 32. He was a co-founder of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, a general in the US Army and the Philippine Army, university president, President of the UN General Assembly, was eventually named one of the Philippines' National Artists in Literature, and was the recipient of many other honors and honorary degrees. He was born in Camiling, Tarlac and he studied at the Camiling Central Elementary School during his basic education.


== Early career ==

Studying in the Philippines and the United States, Dr. Carlos Romulo became a professor of English at the University of the Philippines in 1923.  Simultaneously, Romulo served as the secretary to the President of the Senate of the Philippines Manuel Quezon.  
During the 1930s, Romulo became the publisher and editor of The Philippines Herald, and one of his reporters was Yay Panlilio. On October 31, 1936 Romulo and the other Boy Scouts of the Philippines (BSP) founders officially chartered the BSP in Commonwealth Act No. 111 authorized by President Manuel Quezon.At the start of WWII, Major Carlos Romulo served as an aide to General MacArthur, and was one of the last men evacuated from the Philippines before the surrender of US Forces, as illness had preventing him departing with MacArthur, finally leaving from Del Monte Airfield on Mindanao on 25 April. He reached the rank of general by the end of that war.


== Diplomatic career ==
Romulo served eight Philippine presidents, from Manuel L. Quezon to Ferdinand Marcos, as the  Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines and as the country's representative to the United States and to the United Nations. He also served as the Resident Commissioner to the U.S. House of Representatives during the Commonwealth era. In addition, he served also as the Secretary of Education in President Diosdado P. Macapagal's and President Ferdinand E. Marcos's Cabinet through 1962 to 1968.


=== Resident Commissioner ===
Romulo served as Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States Congress from 1944 to 1946. This was the title of the non-voting Delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives for lands taken in the Spanish–American War, and as such, he is the only member of the U.S. Congress to end his tenure via a legal secession from the Union.


=== United Nations ===
In his career in the United Nations, Romulo was a strong advocate of human rights, freedom, and decolonization. In 1948 in Paris, France, at the third UN General Assembly, he strongly disagreed with a proposal made by the Soviet delegation headed by Andrei Vishinsky, who challenged his credentials by insulting him with this quote: "You are just a little man from a little country." In return, Romulo replied, "It is the duty of the little Davids of this world to fling the pebbles of truth in the eyes of the blustering Goliaths and force them to behave!", leaving Vishinsky with nothing left to do but sit down.


=== Palestine Partition Plan ===
In the days preceding the UN General Assembly vote on the Partition Plan for Palestine, Romulo stated "We hold that the issue is primarily moral. The issue is whether the United Nations should accept responsibility for the enforcement of a policy which is clearly repugnant to the valid nationalist aspirations of the people of Palestine. The Philippines Government holds that the United Nations ought not to accept such responsibility." Thus, he clearly intended to oppose the Partition Plan, or at most abstain in the vote. However, pressure on the Philippines government from Washington led to Romulo being recalled, replaced by a Philippines representative who voted in favor of the Partition Plan.


==== President of the UN General Assembly ====
He served as the President of the Fourth Session of United Nations General Assembly from 1949 to 1950—the first Asian to hold the position—and served as president of the United Nations Security Council four times, twice in 1957, 1980 and 1981. He had served with General Douglas MacArthur in the Pacific, and became the first non-American to win the Pulitzer Prize in Correspondence in 1942. The Pulitzer Prize website says Carlos P. Romulo of the Philippines Herald was awarded "For his observations and forecasts of Far Eastern developments during a tour of the trouble centers from Hong Kong to Batavia."


==== Campaign for Secretary-General ====

Romulo ran for the office of United Nations Secretary-General in the 1953 selection. He fell two votes short of the required 7-vote majority in the Security Council, finishing second to Lester B. Pearson of Canada. His ambitions were further dashed by negative votes from France and the Soviet Union, both of whom were permanent members with veto power. The Security Council eventually settled on a dark horse candidate and selected Dag Hammarskjöld as Secretary-General of the United Nations.


=== Ambassador to the United States ===
From January 1952 to May 1953, Romulo became only the second former member of Congress to become the Ambassador to the United States from a foreign country, following Joaquín M. Elizalde, who had been his immediate predecessor in both posts. He later served as Ambassador again from September 1955 to February 1962.


== Return to the Philippines ==


=== Philippine Presidential Aspiration ===
Instead, he returned to the Philippines and was a candidate for the nomination as the presidential candidate for the Liberal Party, but lost at the party convention to the incumbent Elpidio Quirino, who ran unsuccessfully for re-election against Ramón Magsaysay. Quirino had agreed to a secret ballot at the convention, but after the convention opened, the president demanded an open roll-call voting, leaving the delegates no choice but supporting Quirino, the candidate of the party machine. Feeling betrayed, Romulo left the Liberal Party and became national campaign manager of Magsaysay, the candidate of the opposing Nacionalista Party who won the election.


=== Minister of Foreign Affairs ===
He was the Philippines' Secretary (Minister from 1973 to 1984) of Foreign Affairs under President Elpidio Quirino from 1950 to 1952, under President Diosdado Macapagal from 1963 to 1964 and under President Ferdinand Marcos from 1968 to 1984. In April 1955 he led the Philippines' delegation to the Asian-African Conference at Bandung.


=== Resignation from the Marcos Cabinet ===
Romulo supported President Ferdinand Marcos through most of his presidency. But he resigned in 1983, soon after the assassination of Benigno Aquino, citing poor health.  Gregorio Brillantes interviewed him in 1984, and he said he resigned "heartsick" because of the assassination of Aquino, whom he considered a "friend", and the resulting freefall of the Philippines' economy and international reputation.According to Beth Day Romulo, the Marcos administration had asked him to sign an ad that the administration was planning to place in the New York Times and other major international dailies.  Carlos P. Romulo refused to sign the ad and instead resigned.


== Death ==
He died, at 87, in Manila on 15 December 1985 and was buried in the Heroes' Cemetery (Libingan ng mga Bayani). He was honored as "one of the truly great statesmen of the 20th century." In 1980, he was extolled by United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim as "Mr. United Nations" for his valuable services to the United Nations and his dedication to freedom and world peace.


== Published books ==
Romulo, in all, wrote and published 22 books, which includes The United (novel), I Walked with Heroes (autobiography), I Saw the Fall of the Philippines, Mother America and I See the Philippines Rise (war-time memoirs).


== Honors ==
National Honor

: Quezon Service Cross - (April 17, 1951)
: Philippine Legion of Honor, Commander
: National Artist of the Philippines


== Awards and recognitions ==

Romulo is perhaps among the most decorated Filipinos in history, which includes 72 honorary degrees from different international institutions and universities and 144 awards and decorations from foreign countries:

Nobel Peace Prize nomination in 1952 "For his contribution in international cooperation, in particular on questions on undeveloped areas, and as president for UN's 4th General Assembly"
United States Presidential Medal of Freedom, January 12, 1984
Boy Scouts of America Silver Buffalo Award
Distinguished Service Star of the Philippines
Philippine Gold Cross
Distinguished Silver Star
Purple Heart
Presidential Unit Citation with Two Oak Leaf Clusters
US Legion of Merit (Commander)
Grand Cross of the Order of the Phoenix from the Greek Government
Grand Cross of the Order of Carlos Manuel do Cespedes from the Republic of Cuba
Pulitzer Prize in Correspondence, 1942
World Government News First Annual Gold Nadal Award (for work in the United Nations for peace and world government), March 1947
Princeton University - Woodrow Wilson Memorial Foundation Gold Medal award ("in recognition of his contribution to public life"), May 1947
International Benjamin Franklin Society's Gold Medal (for "distinguished world statesmanship in 1947"), January 1948
Freeman of the City of Plymouth, England, October 1948
United Nations Peace Medal
World Peace Award
Four Freedoms Peace Award
Philippine Presidential Medal of Merit, July 3, 1949
Hero of the Republic Award, 1984
Notre Dame University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D.), 1935
Georgetown University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D.), 1960
Harvard University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D.), 1950


== Anecdotes from Beth Romulo through Reader's Digest (June 1989) ==
At the third UN General Assembly, held in Paris in 1948, the USSR's deputy foreign minister, Andrei Vishinsky, sneered at Romulo and challenged his credentials: "You are just a little man from a little country." "It is the duty of the little Davids of this world," cried Romulo, "to fling the pebbles of truth in the eyes of the blustering Goliaths and force them to behave!"
During his meeting with Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, Marshal Tito welcomed Gen. Romulo with drinks and cigars, to which the general kindly refused. Their conversation went as follows:

Tito: "Do you drink?"
Romulo: "No, I don't."
Tito: "Do you smoke?"
Romulo: "No, thank you."
Tito: "What do you do then?"

Romulo: "I etcetera."
At this, Marshal Tito was tickled by his reply and loudly exclaimed around the room, "I etcetera, etcetera, etcetera!"
Romulo was a dapper little man (barely five feet four inches in shoes). When they waded in at Leyte beach in October 1944, and the word went out that General MacArthur was waist deep, one of Romulo's journalist friends cabled, "If MacArthur was in water waist deep, Romulo must have drowned!"
In later years, Romulo told another story himself about a meeting with MacArthur and other tall American generals who disparaged his physical stature. "Gentlemen," he declared, "When you say something like that, you make me feel like a dime among nickels."


== Books ==

I Saw the Fall of the Philippines.
My Brother Americans
I See The Philippines Rise
I am a Filipino
The United
Crusade in Asia (The John Day Company, 1955; about the 1953 presidential election campaign of Ramón Magsaysay)
The Meaning of Bandung
The Magsaysay Story (with Marvin M. Gray, The John Day Company 1956, updated re-edition by Pocket Books, Special Student Edition, SP-18, December 1957; biography of Ramón Magsaysay, Pocket Books edition updated with an additional chapter on Magsaysay's death)
I Walked with Heroes (autobiography)
Last Man off Bataan (Romulo's experience during the Japanese Plane bombings.)
Romulo: A Third World Soldier at the UN
Daughters for Sale and Other Plays


== See also ==

List of Asian Americans and Pacific Islands Americans in the United States Congress
Resident Commissioner of the Philippines
The Thomasites
Philinda Rand


== References ==

Romulo, Beth (June 1989). "Unforgettable Carlos P. Romulo". Reader's Digest.
Shores, Christopher; Cull, Brian; Izawa, Yasuho (1993). Bloody Shambles: Volume Two: The Defence of Sumatra to the Fall of Burma. London: Grub Street. ISBN 0-948817-67-4.
Zaide, Gregorio F. (1984). Philippine History and Government. National Bookstore Printing Press.Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States Congress


== External links ==
Extensive biographyUnited States Congress. "Carlos P. Romulo (id: R000419)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
A film clip "Longines Chronoscope with Carlos P. Romulo" is available at the Internet Archive
Newspaper clippings about Carlos P. Romulo in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW
[1]